A mammal (from Latin  mamma 'breast') is a vertebrate animal of the class Mammalia (). Mammals are characterized by the presence of milk-producing mammary glands for feeding their young, a broad neocortex region of the brain, fur or hair, and three middle ear bones. These characteristics distinguish them from reptiles and birds, from which their ancestors diverged in the Carboniferous period over 300 million years ago. Around 6,640 extant species of mammals have been described and divided into 27 orders. The study of mammals is called mammalogy.
The largest orders of mammals, by number of species, are the rodents, bats, and eulipotyphlans (including hedgehogs, moles and shrews). The next three are the primates (including humans, monkeys and lemurs), the even-toed ungulates (including pigs, bovids and whales), and the Carnivora (including cats, dogs, and seals).
Mammals are the only living members of Synapsida; this clade, together with Sauropsida (reptiles and birds), constitutes the larger Amniota clade. Early synapsids are referred to as "pelycosaurs." The more advanced therapsids became dominant during the Guadalupian. Mammals originated from cynodonts, an advanced group of therapsids, during the Late Triassic to Early Jurassic. Mammals achieved their modern diversity in the Paleogene and Neogene periods of the Cenozoic era, after the extinction of non-avian dinosaurs, and have been the dominant terrestrial animal group from 66 million years ago to the present.
The basic mammalian body type is quadrupedal, with most mammals using four limbs for terrestrial locomotion; but in some, the limbs are adapted for life at sea, in the air, in trees or underground. The bipeds have adapted to move using only the two lower limbs, while the rear limbs of cetaceans and the sea cows are mere internal vestiges. Mammals range in size from the 30–40 millimetres (1.2–1.6 in) bumblebee bat to the 30 metres (98 ft) blue whale—possibly the largest animal to have ever lived. Maximum lifespan varies from two years for the shrew to 211 years for the bowhead whale. All modern mammals give birth to live young, except the five species of monotremes, which lay eggs. The most species-rich group is the viviparous placental mammals, so named for the temporary organ (placenta) used by offspring to draw nutrition from the mother during gestation.
Most mammals are intelligent, with some possessing large brains, self-awareness, and tool use. Mammals can communicate and vocalize in several ways, including the production of ultrasound, scent marking, alarm signals, singing, echolocation; and, in the case of humans, complex language. Mammals can organize themselves into fission–fusion societies, harems, and hierarchies—but can also be solitary and territorial. Most mammals are polygynous, but some can be monogamous or polyandrous.
Domestication of many types of mammals by humans played a major role in the Neolithic Revolution, and resulted in farming replacing hunting and gathering as the primary source of food for humans. This led to a major restructuring of human societies from nomadic to sedentary, with more co-operation among larger and larger groups, and ultimately the development of the first civilizations. Domesticated mammals provided, and continue to provide, power for transport and agriculture, as well as food (meat and dairy products), fur, and leather. Mammals are also hunted and raced for sport, kept as pets and working animals of various types, and are used as model organisms in science. Mammals have been depicted in art since Paleolithic times, and appear in literature, film, mythology, and religion. The decline in numbers and extinction of many mammals is primarily driven by human poaching and habitat destruction, primarily deforestation.
Classification
Mammal classification has been through several revisions since Carl Linnaeus initially defined the class, and at present, no classification system is universally accepted. McKenna & Bell (1997) and Wilson & Reeder (2005) provide useful recent compendiums. Simpson (1945) provides systematics of mammal origins and relationships that had been taught universally until the end of the 20th century.
However, since 1945, a large amount of new and more detailed information has gradually been found: The paleontological record has been recalibrated, and the intervening years have seen much debate and progress concerning the theoretical underpinnings of systematization itself, partly through the new concept of cladistics. Though fieldwork and lab work progressively outdated Simpson's classification, it remains the closest thing to an official classification of mammals, despite its known issues.
Most mammals, including the six most species-rich orders, belong to the placental group. The three largest orders in numbers of species are Rodentia: mice, rats, porcupines, beavers, capybaras, and other gnawing mammals; Chiroptera: bats; and Eulipotyphla: shrews, moles, and solenodons. The next three biggest orders, depending on the biological classification scheme used, are the primates: apes, monkeys, and lemurs; Cetartiodactyla: whales and even-toed ungulates; and Carnivora which includes cats, dogs, weasels, bears, seals, and allies. According to Mammal Species of the World, 5,416 species were identified in 2006. These were grouped into 1,229 genera, 153 families and 29 orders. In 2008, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) completed a five-year Global Mammal Assessment for its IUCN Red List, which counted 5,488 species. According to research published in the Journal of Mammalogy in 2018, the number of recognized mammal species is 6,495, including 96 recently extinct.
Definitions
The word "mammal" is modern, from the scientific name Mammalia coined by Carl Linnaeus in 1758, derived from the Latin mamma ("teat, pap"). In an influential 1988 paper, Timothy Rowe defined Mammalia phylogenetically as the crown group of mammals, the clade consisting of the most recent common ancestor of living monotremes (echidnas and platypuses) and therians (marsupials and placentals) and all descendants of that ancestor. Since this ancestor lived in the Jurassic Period, Rowe's definition excludes all animals from the earlier Triassic, despite the fact that Triassic fossils in the Haramiyida have been referred to the Mammalia since the mid-19th century. If Mammalia is considered as the crown group, its origin can be roughly dated as the first known appearance of animals more closely related to some extant mammals than to others. Ambondro is more closely related to monotremes than to therian mammals while Amphilestes and Amphitherium are more closely related to the therians; as fossils of all three genera are dated about 167 million years ago in the Middle Jurassic, this is a reasonable estimate for the appearance of the crown group. An older relative of Amphilestes is known from the Early Jurassic.
T. S. Kemp has provided a more traditional definition: "Synapsids that possess a dentary–squamosal jaw articulation and occlusion between upper and lower molars with a transverse component to the movement" or, equivalently in Kemp's view, the clade originating with the last common ancestor of Sinoconodon and living mammals. The earliest-known synapsid satisfying Kemp's definitions is Tikitherium, dated 225 Ma, so the appearance of mammals in this broader sense can be given this Late Triassic date. However, this animal may have actually evolved during the Neogene.
Molecular classification of placentals
As of the early 21st century, molecular studies based on DNA analysis have suggested new relationships among mammal families. Most of these findings have been independently validated by retrotransposon presence/absence data. Classification systems based on molecular studies reveal three major groups or lineages of placentals—Afrotheria, Xenarthra and Boreoeutheria—which diverged in the Cretaceous. The relationships between these three lineages is contentious, and all three possible hypotheses have been proposed with respect to which group is basal. These hypotheses are Atlantogenata (basal Boreoeutheria), Epitheria (basal Xenarthra) and Exafroplacentalia (basal Afrotheria). Boreoeutheria in turn contains two major lineages—Euarchontoglires and Laurasiatheria.
Estimates for the divergence times between these three placental groups range from 105 to 120 million years ago, depending on the type of DNA used (such as nuclear or mitochondrial) and varying interpretations of paleogeographic data.
Mammal phylogeny according to Álvarez-Carretero et al., 2022:
EvolutionOrigins
Synapsida, a clade that contains mammals and their extinct relatives, originated during the Pennsylvanian subperiod (~323 million to ~300 million years ago), when they split from the reptile lineage. Crown group mammals evolved from earlier mammaliaforms during the Early Jurassic. The cladogram takes Mammalia to be the crown group.
Evolution from older amniotes
The first fully terrestrial vertebrates were amniotes. Like their amphibious early tetrapod predecessors, they had lungs and limbs. Amniotic eggs, however, have internal membranes that allow the developing embryo to breathe but keep water in. Hence, amniotes can lay eggs on dry land, while amphibians generally need to lay their eggs in water.
The first amniotes apparently arose in the Pennsylvanian subperiod of the Carboniferous. They descended from earlier reptiliomorph amphibious tetrapods, which lived on land that was already inhabited by insects and other invertebrates as well as ferns, mosses and other plants. Within a few million years, two important amniote lineages became distinct: the synapsids, which would later include the common ancestor of the mammals; and the sauropsids, which now include turtles, lizards, snakes, crocodilians and dinosaurs (including birds). Synapsids have a single hole (temporal fenestra) low on each side of the skull. Primitive synapsids included the largest and fiercest animals of the early Permian such as Dimetrodon. Nonmammalian synapsids were traditionally—and incorrectly—called "mammal-like reptiles" or pelycosaurs; we now know they were neither reptiles nor part of reptile lineage.
Therapsids, a group of synapsids, evolved in the Middle Permian, about 265 million years ago, and became the dominant land vertebrates. They differ from basal eupelycosaurs in several features of the skull and jaws, including: larger skulls and incisors which are equal in size in therapsids, but not for eupelycosaurs. The therapsid lineage leading to mammals went through a series of stages, beginning with animals that were very similar to their early synapsid ancestors and ending with probainognathian cynodonts, some of which could easily be mistaken for mammals. Those stages were characterized by:

The gradual development of a bony secondary palate.
Abrupt acquisition of endothermy among Mammaliamorpha, thus prior to the origin of mammals by 30–50 millions of years .
Progression towards an erect limb posture, which would increase the animals' stamina by avoiding Carrier's constraint. But this process was slow and erratic: for example, all herbivorous nonmammaliaform therapsids retained sprawling limbs (some late forms may have had semierect hind limbs); Permian carnivorous therapsids had sprawling forelimbs, and some late Permian ones also had semisprawling hindlimbs. In fact, modern monotremes still have semisprawling limbs.
The dentary gradually became the main bone of the lower jaw which, by the Triassic, progressed towards the fully mammalian jaw (the lower consisting only of the dentary) and middle ear (which is constructed by the bones that were previously used to construct the jaws of reptiles).
First mammals
The Permian–Triassic extinction event about 252 million years ago, which was a prolonged event due to the accumulation of several extinction pulses, ended the dominance of carnivorous therapsids. In the early Triassic, most medium to large land carnivore niches were taken over by archosaurs which, over an extended period (35 million years), came to include the crocodylomorphs, the pterosaurs and the dinosaurs; however, large cynodonts like Trucidocynodon and traversodontids still occupied large sized carnivorous and herbivorous niches respectively. By the Jurassic, the dinosaurs had come to dominate the large terrestrial herbivore niches as well.
The first mammals (in Kemp's sense) appeared in the Late Triassic epoch (about 225 million years ago), 40 million years after the first therapsids. They expanded out of their nocturnal insectivore niche from the mid-Jurassic onwards; the Jurassic Castorocauda, for example, was a close relative of true mammals that had adaptations for swimming, digging and catching fish. Most, if not all, are thought to have remained nocturnal (the nocturnal bottleneck), accounting for much of the typical mammalian traits. The majority of the mammal species that existed in the Mesozoic Era were multituberculates, eutriconodonts and spalacotheriids. The earliest-known fossil of the Metatheria ("changed beasts") is Sinodelphys, found in 125-million-year-old Early Cretaceous shale in China's northeastern Liaoning Province. The fossil is nearly complete and includes tufts of fur and imprints of soft tissues.

The oldest-known fossil among the Eutheria ("true beasts") is the small shrewlike Juramaia sinensis, or "Jurassic mother from China", dated to 160 million years ago in the late Jurassic. A later eutherian relative, Eomaia, dated to 125 million years ago in the early Cretaceous, possessed some features in common with the marsupials but not with the placentals, evidence that these features were present in the last common ancestor of the two groups but were later lost in the placental lineage. In particular, the epipubic bones extend forwards from the pelvis. These are not found in any modern placental, but they are found in marsupials, monotremes, other nontherian mammals and Ukhaatherium, an early Cretaceous animal in the eutherian order Asioryctitheria. This also applies to the multituberculates. They are apparently an ancestral feature, which subsequently disappeared in the placental lineage. These epipubic bones seem to function by stiffening the muscles during locomotion, reducing the amount of space being presented, which placentals require to contain their fetus during gestation periods. A narrow pelvic outlet indicates that the young were very small at birth and therefore pregnancy was short, as in modern marsupials. This suggests that the placenta was a later development.
One of the earliest-known monotremes was Teinolophos, which lived about 120 million years ago in Australia. Monotremes have some features which may be inherited from the original amniotes such as the same orifice to urinate, defecate and reproduce (cloaca)—as reptiles and birds also do— and they lay eggs which are leathery and uncalcified.
Earliest appearances of features
Hadrocodium, whose fossils date from approximately 195 million years ago, in the early Jurassic, provides the first clear evidence of a jaw joint formed solely by the squamosal and dentary bones; there is no space in the jaw for the articular, a bone involved in the jaws of all early synapsids.

The earliest clear evidence of hair or fur is in fossils of Castorocauda and Megaconus, from 164 million years ago in the mid-Jurassic. In the 1950s, it was suggested that the foramina (passages) in the maxillae and premaxillae (bones in the front of the upper jaw) of cynodonts were channels which supplied blood vessels and nerves to vibrissae (whiskers) and so were evidence of hair or fur; it was soon pointed out, however, that foramina do not necessarily show that an animal had vibrissae, as the modern lizard Tupinambis has foramina that are almost identical to those found in the nonmammalian cynodont Thrinaxodon. Popular sources, nevertheless, continue to attribute whiskers to Thrinaxodon. Studies on Permian coprolites suggest that non-mammalian synapsids of the epoch already had fur, setting the evolution of hairs possibly as far back as dicynodonts.
When endothermy first appeared in the evolution of mammals is uncertain, though it is generally agreed to have first evolved in non-mammalian therapsids. Modern monotremes have lower body temperatures and more variable metabolic rates than marsupials and placentals, but there is evidence that some of their ancestors, perhaps including ancestors of the therians, may have had body temperatures like those of modern therians. Likewise, some modern therians like afrotheres and xenarthrans have secondarily developed lower body temperatures.
The evolution of erect limbs in mammals is incomplete—living and fossil monotremes have sprawling limbs. The parasagittal (nonsprawling) limb posture appeared sometime in the late Jurassic or early Cretaceous; it is found in the eutherian Eomaia and the metatherian Sinodelphys, both dated to 125 million years ago. Epipubic bones, a feature that strongly influenced the reproduction of most mammal clades, are first found in Tritylodontidae, suggesting that it is a synapomorphy between them and Mammaliaformes. They are omnipresent in non-placental Mammaliaformes, though Megazostrodon and Erythrotherium appear to have lacked them.
It has been suggested that the original function of lactation (milk production) was to keep eggs moist. Much of the argument is based on monotremes, the egg-laying mammals. In human females, mammary glands become fully developed during puberty, regardless of pregnancy.
Rise of the mammals
Therians took over the medium- to large-sized ecological niches in the Cenozoic, after the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event approximately 66 million years ago emptied ecological space once filled by non-avian dinosaurs and other groups of reptiles, as well as various other mammal groups, and underwent an exponential increase in body size (megafauna). The increase in mammalian diversity was not, however, solely because of expansion into large-bodied niches. Mammals diversified very quickly, displaying an exponential rise in diversity. For example, the earliest-known bat dates from about 50 million years ago, only 16 million years after the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs.
Molecular phylogenetic studies initially suggested that most placental orders diverged about 100 to 85 million years ago and that modern families appeared in the period from the late Eocene through the Miocene. However, no placental fossils have been found from before the end of the Cretaceous. The earliest undisputed fossils of placentals come from the early Paleocene, after the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs. (Scientists identified an early Paleocene animal named Protungulatum donnae as one of the first placental mammals, but it has since been reclassified as a non-placental eutherian.) Recalibrations of genetic and morphological diversity rates have suggested a Late Cretaceous origin for placentals, and a Paleocene origin for most modern clades.
The earliest-known ancestor of primates is Archicebus achilles from around 55 million years ago. This tiny primate weighed 20–30 grams (0.7–1.1 ounce) and could fit within a human palm.
AnatomyDistinguishing features
Living mammal species can be identified by the presence of sweat glands, including those that are specialized to produce milk to nourish their young. In classifying fossils, however, other features must be used, since soft tissue glands and many other features are not visible in fossils.
Many traits shared by all living mammals appeared among the earliest members of the group:

Jaw joint – The dentary (the lower jaw bone, which carries the teeth) and the squamosal (a small cranial bone) meet to form the joint. In most gnathostomes, including early therapsids, the joint consists of the articular (a small bone at the back of the lower jaw) and quadrate (a small bone at the back of the upper jaw).
Middle ear – In crown-group mammals, sound is carried from the eardrum by a chain of three bones, the malleus, the incus and the stapes. Ancestrally, the malleus and the incus are derived from the articular and the quadrate bones that constituted the jaw joint of early therapsids.
Tooth replacement – Teeth can be replaced once (diphyodonty) or (as in toothed whales and murid rodents) not at all (monophyodonty). Elephants, manatees, and kangaroos continually grow new teeth throughout their life (polyphyodonty).
Prismatic enamel – The enamel coating on the surface of a tooth consists of prisms, solid, rod-like structures extending from the dentin to the tooth's surface.
Occipital condyles – Two knobs at the base of the skull fit into the topmost neck vertebra; most other tetrapods, in contrast, have only one such knob.
For the most part, these characteristics were not present in the Triassic ancestors of the mammals. Nearly all mammaliaforms possess an epipubic bone, the exception being modern placentals.
Sexual dimorphism
On average, male mammals are larger than females, with males being at least 10% larger than females in over 45% of investigated species. Most mammalian orders also exhibit male-biased sexual dimorphism, although some orders do not show any bias or are significantly female-biased (Lagomorpha). Sexual size dimorphism increases with body size across mammals (Rensch's rule), suggesting that there are parallel selection pressures on both male and female size. Male-biased dimorphism relates to sexual selection on males through male–male competition for females, as there is a positive correlation between the degree of sexual selection, as indicated by mating systems, and the degree of male-biased size dimorphism. The degree of sexual selection is also positively correlated with male and female size across mammals. Further, parallel selection pressure on female mass is identified in that age at weaning is significantly higher in more polygynous species, even when correcting for body mass. Also, the reproductive rate is lower for larger females, indicating that fecundity selection selects for smaller females in mammals. Although these patterns hold across mammals as a whole, there is considerable variation across orders.
Biological systems
The majority of mammals have seven cervical vertebrae (bones in the neck). The exceptions are the manatee and the two-toed sloth, which have six, and the three-toed sloth which has nine. All mammalian brains possess a neocortex, a brain region unique to mammals. Placental brains have a corpus callosum, unlike monotremes and marsupials.
Circulatory systems
The mammalian heart has four chambers, two upper atria, the receiving chambers, and two lower ventricles, the discharging chambers. The heart has four valves, which separate its chambers and ensures blood flows in the correct direction through the heart (preventing backflow). After gas exchange in the pulmonary capillaries (blood vessels in the lungs), oxygen-rich blood returns to the left atrium via one of the four pulmonary veins. Blood flows nearly continuously back into the atrium, which acts as the receiving chamber, and from here through an opening into the left ventricle. Most blood flows passively into the heart while both the atria and ventricles are relaxed, but toward the end of the ventricular relaxation period, the left atrium will contract, pumping blood into the ventricle. The heart also requires nutrients and oxygen found in blood like other muscles, and is supplied via coronary arteries.
The red blood cells of mammals also lack a nucleus to make space for more hemoglobin, which significantly increases the cell's oxygen-carrying capacity.
Respiratory systems
The lungs of mammals are spongy and honeycombed. Breathing is mainly achieved with the diaphragm, which divides the thorax from the abdominal cavity, forming a dome convex to the thorax. Contraction of the diaphragm flattens the dome, increasing the volume of the lung cavity. Air enters through the oral and nasal cavities, and travels through the larynx, trachea and bronchi, and expands the alveoli. Relaxing the diaphragm has the opposite effect, decreasing the volume of the lung cavity, causing air to be pushed out of the lungs. During exercise, the abdominal wall contracts, increasing pressure on the diaphragm, which forces air out quicker and more forcefully. The rib cage is able to expand and contract the chest cavity through the action of other respiratory muscles. Consequently, air is sucked into or expelled out of the lungs, always moving down its pressure gradient. This type of lung is known as a bellows lung due to its resemblance to blacksmith bellows.
Integumentary systems
The integumentary system (skin) is made up of three layers: the outermost epidermis, the dermis and the hypodermis. The epidermis is typically 10 to 30 cells thick; its main function is to provide a waterproof layer. Its outermost cells are constantly lost; its bottommost cells are constantly dividing and pushing upward. The middle layer, the dermis, is 15 to 40 times thicker than the epidermis. The dermis is made up of many components, such as bony structures and blood vessels. The hypodermis is made up of adipose tissue, which stores lipids and provides cushioning and insulation. The thickness of this layer varies widely from species to species; marine mammals require a thick hypodermis (blubber) for insulation, and right whales have the thickest blubber at 20 inches (51 cm). Although other animals have features such as whiskers, feathers, setae, or cilia that superficially resemble it, no animals other than mammals have hair. It is a definitive characteristic of the class, though some mammals have very little.
Digestive systems
Herbivores have developed a diverse range of physical structures to facilitate the consumption of plant material. To break up intact plant tissues, mammals have developed teeth structures that reflect their feeding preferences. For instance, frugivores (animals that feed primarily on fruit) and herbivores that feed on soft foliage have low-crowned teeth specialized for grinding foliage and seeds. Grazing animals that tend to eat hard, silica-rich grasses, have high-crowned teeth, which are capable of grinding tough plant tissues and do not wear down as quickly as low-crowned teeth. Most carnivorous mammals have carnassial teeth (of varying length depending on diet), long canines and similar tooth replacement patterns.
The stomach of even-toed ungulates (Artiodactyla) is divided into four sections: the rumen, the reticulum, the omasum and the abomasum (only ruminants have a rumen). After the plant material is consumed, it is mixed with saliva in the rumen and reticulum and separates into solid and liquid material. The solids lump together to form a bolus (or cud), and is regurgitated. When the bolus enters the mouth, the fluid is squeezed out with the tongue and swallowed again. Ingested food passes to the rumen and reticulum where cellulolytic microbes (bacteria, protozoa and fungi) produce cellulase, which is needed to break down the cellulose in plants. Perissodactyls, in contrast to the ruminants, store digested food that has left the stomach in an enlarged cecum, where it is fermented by bacteria. Carnivora have a simple stomach adapted to digest primarily meat, as compared to the elaborate digestive systems of herbivorous animals, which are necessary to break down tough, complex plant fibers. The cecum is either absent or short and simple, and the large intestine is not sacculated or much wider than the small intestine.
Excretory and genitourinary systems
The mammalian excretory system involves many components. Like amphibians, mammals are ureotelic, and convert ammonia into urea, which is done by the liver as part of the urea cycle. Bilirubin, a waste product derived from blood cells, is passed through bile and urine with the help of enzymes excreted by the liver. The passing of bilirubin via bile through the intestinal tract gives mammalian feces a distinctive brown coloration. Distinctive features of the mammalian kidney include the presence of the renal pelvis and renal pyramids, and of a clearly distinguishable cortex and medulla, which is due to the presence of elongated loops of Henle. Only the mammalian kidney has a bean shape, although there are some exceptions, such as the multilobed reniculate kidneys of pinnipeds, cetaceans and bears. Most adult placentals have no remaining trace of the cloaca. In the embryo, the embryonic cloaca divides into a posterior region that becomes part of the anus, and an anterior region that has different fates depending on the sex of the individual: in females, it develops into the vestibule or urogenital sinus that receives the urethra and vagina, while in males it forms the entirety of the penile urethra. However, the afrosoricids and some shrews retain a cloaca as adults. In marsupials, the genital tract is separate from the anus, but a trace of the original cloaca does remain externally. Monotremes, which translates from Greek into "single hole", have a true cloaca. Urine flows from the ureters into the cloaca in monotremes and into the bladder in placentals.
Sound production
As in all other tetrapods, mammals have a larynx that can quickly open and close to produce sounds, and a supralaryngeal vocal tract which filters this sound. The lungs and surrounding musculature provide the air stream and pressure required to phonate. The larynx controls the pitch and volume of sound, but the strength the lungs exert to exhale also contributes to volume. More primitive mammals, such as the echidna, can only hiss, as sound is achieved solely through exhaling through a partially closed larynx. Other mammals phonate using vocal folds. The movement or tenseness of the vocal folds can result in many sounds such as purring and screaming. Mammals can change the position of the larynx, allowing them to breathe through the nose while swallowing through the mouth, and to form both oral and nasal sounds; nasal sounds, such as a dog whine, are generally soft sounds, and oral sounds, such as a dog bark, are generally loud.

Some mammals have a large larynx and thus a low-pitched voice, namely the hammer-headed bat (Hypsignathus monstrosus) where the larynx can take up the entirety of the thoracic cavity while pushing the lungs, heart, and trachea into the abdomen. Large vocal pads can also lower the pitch, as in the low-pitched roars of big cats. The production of infrasound is possible in some mammals such as the African elephant (Loxodonta spp.) and baleen whales. Small mammals with small larynxes have the ability to produce ultrasound, which can be detected by modifications to the middle ear and cochlea. Ultrasound is inaudible to birds and reptiles, which might have been important during the Mesozoic, when birds and reptiles were the dominant predators. This private channel is used by some rodents in, for example, mother-to-pup communication, and by bats when echolocating. Toothed whales also use echolocation, but, as opposed to the vocal membrane that extends upward from the vocal folds, they have a melon to manipulate sounds. Some mammals, namely the primates, have air sacs attached to the larynx, which may function to lower the resonances or increase the volume of sound.
The vocal production system is controlled by the cranial nerve nuclei in the brain, and supplied by the recurrent laryngeal nerve and the superior laryngeal nerve, branches of the vagus nerve. The vocal tract is supplied by the hypoglossal nerve and facial nerves. Electrical stimulation of the periaqueductal gray (PEG) region of the mammalian midbrain elicit vocalizations. The ability to learn new vocalizations is only exemplified in humans, seals, cetaceans, elephants and possibly bats; in humans, this is the result of a direct connection between the motor cortex, which controls movement, and the motor neurons in the spinal cord.
Fur
The primary function of the fur of mammals is thermoregulation. Others include protection, sensory purposes, waterproofing, and camouflage. Different types of fur serve different purposes:

Definitive – which may be shed after reaching a certain length
Vibrissae – sensory hairs, most commonly whiskers
Pelage – guard hairs, under-fur, and awn hair
Spines – stiff guard hair used for defense (such as in porcupines)
Bristles – long hairs usually used in visual signals. (such as a lion's mane)
Velli – often called "down fur" which insulates newborn mammals
Wool – long, soft and often curly
Thermoregulation
Hair length is not a factor in thermoregulation: for example, some tropical mammals such as sloths have the same length of fur length as some arctic mammals but with less insulation; and, conversely, other tropical mammals with short hair have the same insulating value as arctic mammals. The denseness of fur can increase an animal's insulation value, and arctic mammals especially have dense fur; for example, the musk ox has guard hairs measuring 30 cm (12 in) as well as a dense underfur, which forms an airtight coat, allowing them to survive in temperatures of −40 °C (−40 °F). Some desert mammals, such as camels, use dense fur to prevent solar heat from reaching their skin, allowing the animal to stay cool; a camel's fur may reach 70 °C (158 °F) in the summer, but the skin stays at 40 °C (104 °F). Aquatic mammals, conversely, trap air in their fur to conserve heat by keeping the skin dry.
Coloration
Mammalian coats are colored for a variety of reasons, the major selective pressures including camouflage, sexual selection, communication, and thermoregulation. Coloration in both the hair and skin of mammals is mainly determined by the type and amount of melanin; eumelanins for brown and black colors and pheomelanin for a range of yellowish to reddish colors, giving mammals an earth tone. Some mammals have more vibrant colors; certain monkeys such mandrills and vervet monkeys, and opossums such as the Mexican mouse opossums and Derby's woolly opossums, have blue skin due to light diffraction in collagen fibers. Many sloths appear green because their fur hosts green algae; this may be a symbiotic relation that affords camouflage to the sloths.
Camouflage is a powerful influence in a large number of mammals, as it helps to conceal individuals from predators or prey. In arctic and subarctic mammals such as the arctic fox (Alopex lagopus), collared lemming (Dicrostonyx groenlandicus), stoat (Mustela erminea), and snowshoe hare (Lepus americanus), seasonal color change between brown in summer and white in winter is driven largely by camouflage. Some arboreal mammals, notably primates and marsupials, have shades of violet, green, or blue skin on parts of their bodies, indicating some distinct advantage in their largely arboreal habitat due to convergent evolution.
Aposematism, warning off possible predators, is the most likely explanation of the black-and-white pelage of many mammals which are able to defend themselves, such as in the foul-smelling skunk and the powerful and aggressive honey badger. Coat color is sometimes sexually dimorphic, as in many primate species. Differences in female and male coat color may indicate nutrition and hormone levels, important in mate selection. Coat color may influence the ability to retain heat, depending on how much light is reflected. Mammals with a darker colored coat can absorb more heat from solar radiation, and stay warmer, and some smaller mammals, such as voles, have darker fur in the winter. The white, pigmentless fur of arctic mammals, such as the polar bear, may reflect more solar radiation directly onto the skin. The dazzling black-and-white striping of zebras appear to provide some protection from biting flies.
Reproductive system
Mammals reproduce by internal fertilization and are solely gonochoric (having either male or female sex organs).  Male mammals ejaculate semen during copulation through a penis, which may be contained in a prepuce when not erect. Male placentals also urinate through a penis, and some placentals also have a penis bone (baculum). Marsupials typically have forked penises, while echidnas have four-headed penises with two functioning heads. Depending on the species, penile erection is driven either by blood flow into vascular, spongy tissue or by muscular action.  The testicles of most mammals descend into the scrotum which is typically posterior to the penis but is often anterior in marsupials. Female mammals generally have an external vulva and clitoris and labia, two internal paired oviducts, one or two uteri, one or two cervices and a vagina. Marsupials have two lateral vaginas and a medial vagina. The "vagina" of monotremes is better understood as a "urogenital sinus". The uterine systems of placentals can be duplex, with two uteri and cervices which open into the vagina, or bipartite, with two uterine horns with a single cervix connected to the vagina, or bicornuate, with two uterine horns connected distally but separated medially in a Y-shape, or simplex, with a single uterus.

The ancestral condition for mammal reproduction is the birthing of relatively undeveloped young, either through direct vivipary or a short period as soft-shelled eggs. This is likely due to the fact that the torso could not expand due to the presence of epipubic bones. The oldest demonstration of this reproductive style is with Kayentatherium, which produced undeveloped perinates, but at much higher litter sizes than any modern mammal, 38 specimens. Most modern mammals are viviparous, giving birth to live young. However, the five species of monotreme, the platypus and the four species of echidna, lay eggs. The monotremes have a sex-determination system different from that of most other mammals. In particular, the sex chromosomes of a platypus are more like those of a chicken than those of a therian mammal.
Viviparous mammals are in the subclass Theria; those living today are in the marsupial and placental infraclasses. Marsupials have a short gestation period, typically shorter than its estrous cycle and generally giving birth to a number of undeveloped newborns that then undergo further development; in many species, this takes place within a pouch-like sac, the marsupium, located in the front of the mother's abdomen. This is the plesiomorphic condition among viviparous mammals; the presence of epipubic bones in all non-placentals prevents the expansion of the torso needed for full pregnancy. Even non-placental eutherians probably reproduced this way. The placentals give birth to relatively complete and developed young, usually after long gestation periods. They get their name from the placenta, which connects the developing fetus to the uterine wall to allow nutrient uptake. In placentals, the epipubic is either completely lost or converted into the baculum; allowing the torso to be able to expand and thus birth developed offspring. The great majority of mammals give birth multiple times during their lifespan, but a few species are semelparous.
The mammary glands of mammals are specialized to produce milk, the primary source of nutrition for newborns. The monotremes branched early from other mammals and do not have the teats seen in most mammals, but they do have mammary glands. The young lick the milk from a mammary patch on the mother's belly. Compared to placental mammals, the milk of marsupials changes greatly in both production rate and in nutrient composition, due to the underdeveloped young. In addition, the mammary glands have more autonomy allowing them to supply separate milks to young at different development stages. Lactose is the main sugar in placental milk while monotreme and marsupial milk is dominated by oligosaccharides. Weaning is the process in which a mammal becomes less dependent on their mother's milk and more on solid food.
Endothermy
Nearly all mammals are endothermic ("warm-blooded"). Most mammals also have hair to help keep them warm. Like birds, mammals can forage or hunt in weather and climates too cold for ectothermic ("cold-blooded") reptiles and insects. Endothermy requires plenty of food energy, so mammals eat more food per unit of body weight than most reptiles. Small insectivorous mammals eat prodigious amounts for their size. A rare exception, the naked mole-rat produces little metabolic heat, so it is considered an operational poikilotherm. Birds are also endothermic, so endothermy is not unique to mammals.
Species lifespan
Among mammals, species maximum lifespan varies significantly from one year in the yellow-sided opossum to 211 years in the oldest bowhead whale recorded. Although the underlying basis for these lifespan differences is still uncertain, numerous studies indicate that the ability to repair DNA damage is an important determinant of mammalian lifespan. In a 1974 study by Hart and Setlow, it was found that DNA excision repair capability increased systematically with species lifespan among seven mammalian species. Species lifespan was observed to be robustly correlated with the capacity to recognize DNA double-strand breaks as well as the level of the DNA repair protein Ku80. In a study of the cells from sixteen mammalian species, genes employed in DNA repair were found to be up-regulated in the longer-lived species. The cellular level of the DNA repair enzyme poly ADP ribose polymerase was found to correlate with species lifespan in a study of 13 mammalian species. Three additional studies of a variety of mammalian species also reported a correlation between species lifespan and DNA repair capability.
LocomotionTerrestrial
Most vertebrates are plantigrade, walking on the whole of the underside of the foot. Many mammals, such as cats and dogs, are digitigrade, walking on their toes, the greater stride length allowing more speed. Some animals such as horses are unguligrade, walking on the tips of their toes. This even further increases their stride length and thus their speed. A few mammals, namely the great apes, are also known to walk on their knuckles, at least for their front legs. Giant anteaters and platypuses are also knuckle-walkers. Some mammals are bipeds, using only two limbs for locomotion, which can be seen in, for example, humans and the great apes. Bipedal species have a larger field of vision than quadrupeds, conserve more energy and have the ability to manipulate objects with their hands, which aids in foraging. Instead of walking, some bipeds hop, such as kangaroos and kangaroo rats.
Animals will use different gaits for different speeds, terrain and situations. For example, horses show four natural gaits, the slowest horse gait is the walk, then there are three faster gaits which, from slowest to fastest, are the trot, the canter and the gallop. Animals may also have unusual gaits that are used occasionally, such as for moving sideways or backwards. For example, the main human gaits are bipedal walking and running, but they employ many other gaits occasionally, including a four-legged crawl in tight spaces. Mammals show a vast range of gaits, the order that they place and lift their appendages in locomotion. Gaits can be grouped into categories according to their patterns of support sequence. For quadrupeds, there are three main categories: walking gaits, running gaits and leaping gaits. Walking is the most common gait, where some feet are on the ground at any given time, and found in almost all legged animals. Running is considered to occur when at some points in the stride all feet are off the ground in a moment of suspension.
Arboreal
Arboreal animals frequently have elongated limbs that help them cross gaps, reach fruit or other resources, test the firmness of support ahead and, in some cases, to brachiate (swing between trees). Many arboreal species, such as tree porcupines, silky anteaters, spider monkeys, and possums, use prehensile tails to grasp branches. In the spider monkey, the tip of the tail has either a bare patch or adhesive pad, which provides increased friction. Claws can be used to interact with rough substrates and reorient the direction of forces the animal applies. This is what allows squirrels to climb tree trunks that are so large to be essentially flat from the perspective of such a small animal. However, claws can interfere with an animal's ability to grasp very small branches, as they may wrap too far around and prick the animal's own paw. Frictional gripping is used by primates, relying upon hairless fingertips. Squeezing the branch between the fingertips generates frictional force that holds the animal's hand to the branch. However, this type of grip depends upon the angle of the frictional force, thus upon the diameter of the branch, with larger branches resulting in reduced gripping ability. To control descent, especially down large diameter branches, some arboreal animals such as squirrels have evolved highly mobile ankle joints that permit rotating the foot into a 'reversed' posture. This allows the claws to hook into the rough surface of the bark, opposing the force of gravity. Small size provides many advantages to arboreal species: such as increasing the relative size of branches to the animal, lower center of mass, increased stability, lower mass (allowing movement on smaller branches) and the ability to move through more cluttered habitat. Size relating to weight affects gliding animals such as the sugar glider. Some species of primate, bat and all species of sloth achieve passive stability by hanging beneath the branch. Both pitching and tipping become irrelevant, as the only method of failure would be losing their grip.
Aerial
Bats are the only mammals that can truly fly. They fly through the air at a constant speed by moving their wings up and down (usually with some fore-aft movement as well). Because the animal is in motion, there is some airflow relative to its body which, combined with the velocity of the wings, generates a faster airflow moving over the wing. This generates a lift force vector pointing forwards and upwards, and a drag force vector pointing rearwards and upwards. The upwards components of these counteract gravity, keeping the body in the air, while the forward component provides thrust to counteract both the drag from the wing and from the body as a whole.
The wings of bats are much thinner and consist of more bones than those of birds, allowing bats to maneuvere more accurately and fly with more lift and less drag. By folding the wings inwards towards their body on the upstroke, they use 35% less energy during flight than birds. The membranes are delicate, ripping easily; however, the tissue of the bat's membrane is able to regrow, such that small tears can heal quickly. The surface of their wings is equipped with touch-sensitive receptors on small bumps called Merkel cells, also found on human fingertips. These sensitive areas are different in bats, as each bump has a tiny hair in the center, making it even more sensitive and allowing the bat to detect and collect information about the air flowing over its wings, and to fly more efficiently by changing the shape of its wings in response.
Fossorial and subterranean
A fossorial (from Latin fossor, meaning "digger") is an animal adapted to digging which lives primarily, but not solely, underground. Some examples are badgers, and naked mole-rats. Many rodent species are also considered fossorial because they live in burrows for most but not all of the day. Species that live exclusively underground are subterranean, and those with limited adaptations to a fossorial lifestyle sub-fossorial. Some organisms are fossorial to aid in temperature regulation while others use the underground habitat for protection from predators or for food storage.
Fossorial mammals have a fusiform body, thickest at the shoulders and tapering off at the tail and nose. Unable to see in the dark burrows, most have degenerated eyes, but degeneration varies between species; pocket gophers, for example, are only semi-fossorial and have very small yet functional eyes, in the fully fossorial marsupial mole, the eyes are degenerated and useless, Talpa moles have vestigial eyes and the Cape golden mole has a layer of skin covering the eyes. External ears flaps are also very small or absent. Truly fossorial mammals have short, stout legs as strength is more important than speed to a burrowing mammal, but semi-fossorial mammals have cursorial legs. The front paws are broad and have strong claws to help in loosening dirt while excavating burrows, and the back paws have webbing, as well as claws, which aids in throwing loosened dirt backwards. Most have large incisors to prevent dirt from flying into their mouth.
Many fossorial mammals such as shrews, hedgehogs, and moles were classified under the now obsolete order Insectivora.
Aquatic
Fully aquatic mammals, the cetaceans and sirenians, have lost their legs and have a tail fin to propel themselves through the water. Flipper movement is continuous. Whales swim by moving their tail fin and lower body up and down, propellling themselves through vertical movement, while their flippers are mainly used for steering. Their skeletal anatomy allows them to be fast swimmers. Most species have a dorsal fin to prevent themselves from turning upside-down in the water. The flukes of sirenians are raised up and down in long strokes to move the animal forward, and can be twisted to turn. The forelimbs are paddle-like flippers which aid in turning and slowing.
Semi-aquatic mammals, like pinnipeds, have two pairs of flippers on the front and back, the fore-flippers and hind-flippers. The elbows and ankles are enclosed within the body. Pinnipeds have several adaptions for reducing drag. In addition to their streamlined bodies, they have smooth networks of muscle bundles in their skin that may increase laminar flow and make it easier for them to slip through water. They also lack arrector pili, so their fur can be streamlined as they swim. They rely on their fore-flippers for locomotion in a wing-like manner similar to penguins and sea turtles. Fore-flipper movement is not continuous, and the animal glides between each stroke. Compared to terrestrial carnivorans, the fore-limbs are reduced in length, which gives the locomotor muscles at the shoulder and elbow joints greater mechanical advantage; the hind-flippers serve as stabilizers. Other semi-aquatic mammals include beavers, hippopotamuses, otters and platypuses. Hippos are very large semi-aquatic mammals, and their barrel-shaped bodies have graviportal skeletal structures, adapted to carrying their enormous weight, and their specific gravity allows them to sink and move along the bottom of a river.
BehaviorCommunication and vocalization
Many mammals communicate by vocalizing. Vocal communication serves many purposes, including in mating rituals, as warning calls, to indicate food sources, and for social purposes. Males often call during mating rituals to ward off other males and to attract females, as in the roaring of lions and red deer. The songs of the humpback whale may be signals to females; they have different dialects in different regions of the ocean. Social vocalizations include the territorial calls of gibbons, and the use of frequency in greater spear-nosed bats to distinguish between groups. The vervet monkey gives a distinct alarm call for each of at least four different predators, and the reactions of other monkeys vary according to the call. For example, if an alarm call signals a python, the monkeys climb into the trees, whereas the eagle alarm causes monkeys to seek a hiding place on the ground. Prairie dogs similarly have complex calls that signal the type, size, and speed of an approaching predator. Elephants communicate socially with a variety of sounds including snorting, screaming, trumpeting, roaring and rumbling. Some of the rumbling calls are infrasonic, below the hearing range of humans, and can be heard by other elephants up to 6 miles (9.7 km) away at still times near sunrise and sunset.

Mammals signal by a variety of means. Many give visual anti-predator signals, as when deer and gazelle stot, honestly indicating their fit condition and their ability to escape, or when white-tailed deer and other prey mammals flag with conspicuous tail markings when alarmed, informing the predator that it has been detected. Many mammals make use of scent-marking, sometimes possibly to help defend territory, but probably with a range of functions both within and between species. Microbats and toothed whales including oceanic dolphins vocalize both socially and in echolocation.
Feeding
To maintain a high constant body temperature is energy expensive—mammals therefore need a nutritious and plentiful diet. While the earliest mammals were probably predators, different species have since adapted to meet their dietary requirements in a variety of ways. Some eat other animals—this is a carnivorous diet (and includes insectivorous diets). Other mammals, called herbivores, eat plants, which contain complex carbohydrates such as cellulose. An herbivorous diet includes subtypes such as granivory (seed eating), folivory (leaf eating), frugivory (fruit eating), nectarivory (nectar eating), gummivory (gum eating) and mycophagy (fungus eating). The digestive tract of an herbivore is host to bacteria that ferment these complex substances, and make them available for digestion, which are either housed in the multichambered stomach or in a large cecum. Some mammals are coprophagous, consuming feces to absorb the nutrients not digested when the food was first ingested. An omnivore eats both prey and plants. Carnivorous mammals have a simple digestive tract because the proteins, lipids and minerals found in meat require little in the way of specialized digestion. Exceptions to this include baleen whales who also house gut flora in a multi-chambered stomach, like terrestrial herbivores.
The size of an animal is also a factor in determining diet type (Allen's rule). Since small mammals have a high ratio of heat-losing surface area to heat-generating volume, they tend to have high energy requirements and a high metabolic rate. Mammals that weigh less than about 18 ounces (510 g; 1.1 lb) are mostly insectivorous because they cannot tolerate the slow, complex digestive process of an herbivore. Larger animals, on the other hand, generate more heat and less of this heat is lost. They can therefore tolerate either a slower collection process (carnivores that feed on larger vertebrates) or a slower digestive process (herbivores). Furthermore, mammals that weigh more than 18 ounces (510 g; 1.1 lb) usually cannot collect enough insects during their waking hours to sustain themselves. The only large insectivorous mammals are those that feed on huge colonies of insects (ants or termites).

Some mammals are omnivores and display varying degrees of carnivory and herbivory, generally leaning in favor of one more than the other. Since plants and meat are digested differently, there is a preference for one over the other, as in bears where some species may be mostly carnivorous and others mostly herbivorous. They are grouped into three categories: mesocarnivory (50–70% meat), hypercarnivory (70% and greater of meat), and hypocarnivory (50% or less of meat). The dentition of hypocarnivores consists of dull, triangular carnassial teeth meant for grinding food. Hypercarnivores, however, have conical teeth and sharp carnassials meant for slashing, and in some cases strong jaws for bone-crushing, as in the case of hyenas, allowing them to consume bones; some extinct groups, notably the Machairodontinae, had saber-shaped canines.
Some physiological carnivores consume plant matter and some physiological herbivores consume meat. From a behavioral aspect, this would make them omnivores, but from the physiological standpoint, this may be due to zoopharmacognosy. Physiologically, animals must be able to obtain both energy and nutrients from plant and animal materials to be considered omnivorous. Thus, such animals are still able to be classified as carnivores and herbivores when they are just obtaining nutrients from materials originating from sources that do not seemingly complement their classification. For example, it is well documented that some ungulates such as giraffes, camels, and cattle, will gnaw on bones to consume particular minerals and nutrients. Also, cats, which are generally regarded as obligate carnivores, occasionally eat grass to regurgitate indigestible material (such as hairballs), aid with hemoglobin production, and as a laxative.
Many mammals, in the absence of sufficient food requirements in an environment, suppress their metabolism and conserve energy in a process known as hibernation. In the period preceding hibernation, larger mammals, such as bears, become polyphagic to increase fat stores, whereas smaller mammals prefer to collect and stash food. The slowing of the metabolism is accompanied by a decreased heart and respiratory rate, as well as a drop in internal temperatures, which can be around ambient temperature in some cases. For example, the internal temperatures of hibernating Arctic ground squirrels can drop to −2.9 °C (26.8 °F); however, the head and neck always stay above 0 °C (32 °F). A few mammals in hot environments aestivate in times of drought or extreme heat, for example the fat-tailed dwarf lemur (Cheirogaleus medius).
DrinkingIntelligence
In intelligent mammals, such as primates, the cerebrum is larger relative to the rest of the brain. Intelligence itself is not easy to define, but indications of intelligence include the ability to learn, matched with behavioral flexibility. Rats, for example, are considered to be highly intelligent, as they can learn and perform new tasks, an ability that may be important when they first colonize a fresh habitat. In some mammals, food gathering appears to be related to intelligence: a deer feeding on plants has a brain smaller than a cat, which must think to outwit its prey.

Tool use by animals may indicate different levels of learning and cognition. The sea otter uses rocks as essential and regular parts of its foraging behavior (smashing abalone from rocks or breaking open shells), with some populations spending 21% of their time making tools. Other tool use, such as chimpanzees using twigs to "fish" for termites, may be developed by watching others use tools and may even be a true example of animal teaching. Tools may even be used in solving puzzles in which the animal appears to experience a "Eureka moment". Other mammals that do not use tools, such as dogs, can also experience a Eureka moment.
Brain size was previously considered a major indicator of the intelligence of an animal. Since most of the brain is used for maintaining bodily functions, greater ratios of brain to body mass may increase the amount of brain mass available for more complex cognitive tasks. Allometric analysis indicates that mammalian brain size scales at approximately the 2⁄3 or 3⁄4 exponent of the body mass. Comparison of a particular animal's brain size with the expected brain size based on such allometric analysis provides an encephalization quotient that can be used as another indication of animal intelligence. Sperm whales have the largest brain mass of any animal on earth, averaging 8,000 cubic centimetres (490 cu in) and 7.8 kilograms (17 lb) in mature males.
Self-awareness appears to be a sign of abstract thinking. Self-awareness, although not well-defined, is believed to be a precursor to more advanced processes such as metacognitive reasoning. The traditional method for measuring this is the mirror test, which determines if an animal possesses the ability of self-recognition. Mammals that have passed the mirror test include Asian elephants (some pass, some do not); chimpanzees; bonobos; orangutans; humans, from 18 months (mirror stage); common bottlenose dolphins; orcas; and false killer whales.
Social structure
Eusociality is the highest level of social organization. These societies have an overlap of adult generations, the division of reproductive labor and cooperative caring of young. Usually insects, such as bees, ants and termites, have eusocial behavior, but it is demonstrated in two rodent species: the naked mole-rat and the Damaraland mole-rat.
Presociality is when animals exhibit more than just sexual interactions with members of the same species, but fall short of qualifying as eusocial. That is, presocial animals can display communal living, cooperative care of young, or primitive division of reproductive labor, but they do not display all of the three essential traits of eusocial animals. Humans and some species of Callitrichidae (marmosets and tamarins) are unique among primates in their degree of cooperative care of young. Harry Harlow set up an experiment with rhesus monkeys, presocial primates, in 1958; the results from this study showed that social encounters are necessary in order for the young monkeys to develop both mentally and sexually.
A fission–fusion society is a society that changes frequently in its size and composition, making up a permanent social group called the "parent group". Permanent social networks consist of all individual members of a community and often varies to track changes in their environment. In a fission–fusion society, the main parent group can fracture (fission) into smaller stable subgroups or individuals to adapt to environmental or social circumstances. For example, a number of males may break off from the main group in order to hunt or forage for food during the day, but at night they may return to join (fusion) the primary group to share food and partake in other activities. Many mammals exhibit this, such as primates (for example orangutans and spider monkeys), elephants, spotted hyenas, lions, and dolphins.
Solitary animals defend a territory and avoid social interactions with the members of its species, except during breeding season. This is to avoid resource competition, as two individuals of the same species would occupy the same niche, and to prevent depletion of food. A solitary animal, while foraging, can also be less conspicuous to predators or prey.

In a hierarchy, individuals are either dominant or submissive. A despotic hierarchy is where one individual is dominant while the others are submissive, as in wolves and lemurs, and a pecking order is a linear ranking of individuals where there is a top individual and a bottom individual. Pecking orders may also be ranked by sex, where the lowest individual of a sex has a higher ranking than the top individual of the other sex, as in hyenas. Dominant individuals, or alphas, have a high chance of reproductive success, especially in harems where one or a few males (resident males) have exclusive breeding rights to females in a group. Non-resident males can also be accepted in harems, but some species, such as the common vampire bat (Desmodus rotundus), may be more strict.
Some mammals are perfectly monogamous, meaning that they mate for life and take no other partners (even after the original mate's death), as with wolves, Eurasian beavers, and otters. There are three types of polygamy: either one or multiple dominant males have breeding rights (polygyny), multiple males that females mate with (polyandry), or multiple males have exclusive relations with multiple females (polygynandry). It is much more common for polygynous mating to happen, which, excluding leks, are estimated to occur in up to 90% of mammals. Lek mating occurs when males congregate around females and try to attract them with various courtship displays and vocalizations, as in harbor seals.
All higher mammals (excluding monotremes) share two major adaptations for care of the young: live birth and lactation. These imply a group-wide choice of a degree of parental care. They may build nests and dig burrows to raise their young in, or feed and guard them often for a prolonged period of time. Many mammals are K-selected, and invest more time and energy into their young than do r-selected animals. When two animals mate, they both share an interest in the success of the offspring, though often to different extremes. Mammalian females exhibit some degree of maternal aggression, another example of parental care, which may be targeted against other females of the species or the young of other females; however, some mammals may "aunt" the infants of other females, and care for them. Mammalian males may play a role in child rearing, as with tenrecs, however this varies species to species, even within the same genus. For example, the males of the southern pig-tailed macaque (Macaca nemestrina) do not participate in child care, whereas the males of the Japanese macaque (M. fuscata) do.
Humans and other mammalsIn human culture
Non-human mammals play a wide variety of roles in human culture. They are the most popular of pets, with tens of millions of dogs, cats and other animals including rabbits and mice kept by families around the world. Mammals such as mammoths, horses and deer are among the earliest subjects of art, being found in Upper Paleolithic cave paintings such as at Lascaux. Major artists such as Albrecht Dürer, George Stubbs and Edwin Landseer are known for their portraits of mammals. Many species of mammals have been hunted for sport and for food; deer and wild boar are especially popular as game animals. Mammals such as horses and dogs are widely raced for sport, often combined with betting on the outcome. There is a tension between the role of animals as companions to humans, and their existence as individuals with rights of their own. Mammals further play a wide variety of roles in literature, film, mythology, and religion.
Uses and importance
The domestication of mammals was instrumental in the Neolithic development of agriculture and of civilization, causing farmers to replace hunter-gatherers around the world. This transition from hunting and gathering to herding flocks and growing crops was a major step in human history. The new agricultural economies, based on domesticated mammals, caused "radical restructuring of human societies, worldwide alterations in biodiversity, and significant changes in the Earth's landforms and its atmosphere... momentous outcomes".
Domestic mammals form a large part of the livestock raised for meat across the world. They include (2009) around 1.4 billion cattle, 1 billion sheep, 1 billion domestic pigs, and (1985) over 700 million rabbits. Working domestic animals including cattle and horses have been used for work and transport from the origins of agriculture, their numbers declining with the arrival of mechanized transport and agricultural machinery. In 2004 they still provided some 80% of the power for the mainly small farms in the third world, and some 20% of the world's transport, again mainly in rural areas. In mountainous regions unsuitable for wheeled vehicles, pack animals continue to transport goods. Mammal skins provide leather for shoes, clothing and upholstery. Wool from mammals including sheep, goats and alpacas has been used for centuries for clothing.

Mammals serve a major role in science as experimental animals, both in fundamental biological research, such as in genetics, and in the development of new medicines, which must be tested exhaustively to demonstrate their safety. Millions of mammals, especially mice and rats, are used in experiments each year. A knockout mouse is a genetically modified mouse with an inactivated gene, replaced or disrupted with an artificial piece of DNA. They enable the study of sequenced genes whose functions are unknown. A small percentage of the mammals are non-human primates, used in research for their similarity to humans.
Despite the benefits domesticated mammals had for human development, humans have an increasingly detrimental effect on wild mammals across the world. It has been estimated that the mass of all wild mammals has declined to only 4% of all mammals, with 96% of mammals being humans and their livestock now (see figure). In fact, terrestrial wild mammals make up only 2% of all mammals.
Hybrids
Hybrids are offspring resulting from the breeding of two genetically distinct individuals, which usually will result in a high degree of heterozygosity, though hybrid and heterozygous are not synonymous. The deliberate or accidental hybridizing of two or more species of closely related animals through captive breeding is a human activity which has been in existence for millennia and has grown for economic purposes. Hybrids between different subspecies within a species (such as between the Bengal tiger and Siberian tiger) are known as intra-specific hybrids. Hybrids between different species within the same genus (such as between lions and tigers) are known as interspecific hybrids or crosses. Hybrids between different genera (such as between sheep and goats) are known as intergeneric hybrids. Natural hybrids will occur in hybrid zones, where two populations of species within the same genera or species living in the same or adjacent areas will interbreed with each other. Some hybrids have been recognized as species, such as the red wolf (though this is controversial).
Artificial selection, the deliberate selective breeding of domestic animals, is being used to breed back recently extinct animals in an attempt to achieve an animal breed with a phenotype that resembles that extinct wildtype ancestor. A breeding-back (intraspecific) hybrid may be very similar to the extinct wildtype in appearance, ecological niche and to some extent genetics, but the initial gene pool of that wild type is lost forever with its extinction. As a result, bred-back breeds are at best vague look-alikes of extinct wildtypes, as Heck cattle are of the aurochs.
Purebred wild species evolved to a specific ecology can be threatened with extinction through the process of genetic pollution, the uncontrolled hybridization, introgression genetic swamping which leads to homogenization or out-competition from the heterosic hybrid species. When new populations are imported or selectively bred by people, or when habitat modification brings previously isolated species into contact, extinction in some species, especially rare varieties, is possible. Interbreeding can swamp the rarer gene pool and create hybrids, depleting the purebred gene pool. For example, the endangered wild water buffalo is most threatened with extinction by genetic pollution from the domestic water buffalo. Such extinctions are not always apparent from a morphological standpoint. Some degree of gene flow is a normal evolutionary process, nevertheless, hybridization threatens the existence of rare species.
Threats
The loss of species from ecological communities, defaunation, is primarily driven by human activity. This has resulted in empty forests, ecological communities depleted of large vertebrates. In the Quaternary extinction event, the mass die-off of megafaunal variety coincided with the appearance of humans, suggesting a human influence. One hypothesis is that humans hunted large mammals, such as the woolly mammoth, into extinction. The 2019 Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services by IPBES states that the total biomass of wild mammals has declined by 82 percent since the beginning of human civilization. Wild animals make up just 4% of mammalian biomass on earth, while humans and their domesticated animals make up 96%.
Various species are predicted to become extinct in the near future, among them the rhinoceros, giraffes, and species of primates and pangolins. According to the WWF's 2020 Living Planet Report, vertebrate wildlife populations have declined by 68% since 1970 as a result of human activities, particularly overconsumption, population growth and intensive farming, which is evidence that humans have triggered a sixth mass extinction event. Hunting alone threatens hundreds of mammalian species around the world. Scientists claim that the growing demand for meat is contributing to biodiversity loss as this is a significant driver of deforestation and habitat destruction; species-rich habitats, such as significant portions of the Amazon rainforest, are being converted to agricultural land for meat production. Another influence is over-hunting and poaching, which can reduce the overall population of game animals, especially those located near villages, as in the case of peccaries. The effects of poaching can especially be seen in the ivory trade with African elephants. Marine mammals are at risk from entanglement from fishing gear, notably cetaceans, with discard mortalities ranging from 65,000 to 86,000 individuals annually.
Attention is being given to endangered species globally, notably through the Convention on Biological Diversity, otherwise known as the Rio Accord, which includes 189 signatory countries that are focused on identifying endangered species and habitats. Another notable conservation organization is the IUCN, which has a membership of over 1,200 governmental and non-governmental organizations.
Recent extinctions can be directly attributed to human influences. The IUCN characterizes 'recent' extinction as those that have occurred past the cut-off point of 1500, and around 80 mammal species have gone extinct since that time and 2015. Some species, such as the Père David's deer are extinct in the wild, and survive solely in captive populations. Other populations, such as the Florida panther, are ecologically extinct, surviving in such low numbers that they essentially have no impact on the ecosystem. Other populations are only locally extinct (extirpated), still existing elsewhere, but reduced in distribution, as with the extinction of gray whales in the Atlantic.


A mammal is a vertebrate animal with milk-producing glands.
Mammal, Mammals or Mammalia may also refer to:
Music
Mammal (band), an Australian rock/metal group
Mammal (EP), their debut EP
The Mammals, an American folk rock band
Mammal (album), by Irish metal band Altar of Plagues
"Mammal", a song on Apollo 18 (album) by They Might Be Giants
Mammalia, Comparative Anatomy's debut album
Other media
Mammal (film), a 2016 Irish film
Mammals (play), by Amelia Bullmore
Mammals (TV series), a 2022 British Amazon-produced comedy
"Mammals" (Life), a 2009 TV nature documentary episode


Marine mammals are mammals that rely on marine ecosystems for their existence. They include animals such as cetaceans, pinnipeds, sirenians, marine otters, sea otters and polar bears. They are an informal group, unified only by their reliance on marine environments for feeding and survival.
Marine mammal adaptation to an aquatic lifestyle varies considerably between species. Both cetaceans and sirenians are fully aquatic and therefore are obligate water dwellers. Pinnipeds are semiaquatic; they spend the majority of their time in the water but need to return to land for important activities such as mating, breeding and molting. Sea otters tend to live in kelp forests and estuaries. In contrast, the polar bear is mostly terrestrial and only goes into the water on occasions of necessity, and are thus much less adapted to aquatic living. The diets of marine mammals vary considerably as well; some eat zooplankton, others eat fish, squid, shellfish, or seagrass, and a few eat other mammals. While the number of marine mammals is small compared to those found on land, their roles in various ecosystems are large, especially concerning the maintenance of marine ecosystems, through processes including the regulation of prey populations. This role in maintaining ecosystems makes them of particular concern as 23% of marine mammal species are currently threatened.
Marine mammals were first hunted by aboriginal peoples for food and other resources. Many were also the target for commercial industry, leading to a sharp decline in all populations of exploited species, such as whales and seals. Commercial hunting led to the extinction of the Steller's sea cow, sea mink, Japanese sea lion and Caribbean monk seal, and possibly the Baiji. After commercial hunting ended, some species, such as the gray whale and northern elephant seal, have rebounded in numbers; conversely, other species, such as the North Atlantic right whale, are critically endangered. Other than being hunted, marine mammals can be killed as bycatch from fisheries, where for example they can become entangled in nets and drown or starve. Increased ocean traffic causes collisions between fast ocean vessels and large marine mammals. Habitat degradation also threatens marine mammals and their ability to find and catch food. Noise pollution, for example, may adversely affect echolocating mammals, and the ongoing effects of global warming degrade Arctic environments.
TaxonomyClassification of extant species
Order Cetartiodactyla
Suborder Whippomorpha
Family Balaenidae (right and bowhead whales), two genera and four species
Family Cetotheriidae (pygmy right whale), one genus and two species
Family Balaenopteridae (rorquals), two genera and nine species
Family Eschrichtiidae (gray whale), one species
Family Physeteridae (sperm whale), one species
Family Kogiidae (pygmy and dwarf sperm whales), one genus and two species
Family Monodontidae (narwhal and beluga), two genera and two species
Family Ziphiidae (beaked whales), six genera and 24 species
Family Delphinidae (oceanic dolphins), 17 genera and 38 species
Family Phocoenidae (porpoises), two genera and seven species
Family Iniidae (New world river dolphins), one genus and three species
Family Platanistidae (South Asian river dolphins), one genus and two species
Family Pontoporiidae (La Plata dolphin), one species
Order Sirenia (sea cows)
Family Trichechidae (manatees), three species
Family Dugongidae (dugongs), one species
Order Carnivora (carnivorans)
Suborder Caniformia
Family Mustelidae, two species
Family Ursidae (bears), one species
Infraorder Pinnipedia (sealions, walruses, seals)
Family Otariidae (eared seals), seven genera and 15 species
Family Odobenidae (walrus), one species
Family Phocidae (earless seals), 14 genera and 18 species
The term "marine mammal" encompasses all mammals whose survival depends entirely or almost entirely on the oceans, which have also evolved several specialized aquatic traits. In addition to the above, several other mammals have a great dependency on the sea without having become so anatomically specialized, otherwise known as "quasi-marine mammals". This term can include: the greater bulldog bat (Noctilio leporinus), the fish-eating bat (Myotis vivesi), the arctic fox (Vulpes lagopus) which often scavenges polar bear kills, coastal gray wolf (Canis lupus) populations which predominantly eat salmon and marine carcasses, the North Ronaldsay sheep (Ovis aries) which normally eats seaweed outside the lambing season, the Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra) which is usually found in freshwater but can be found along coastal Scotland, and others.
Evolution
Marine mammals form a diverse group of 129 species that rely on the ocean for their existence. They are an informal group unified only by their reliance on marine environments for feeding. Despite the diversity in anatomy seen between groups, improved foraging efficiency has been the main driver in their evolution. The level of dependence on the marine environment varies considerably with species. For example, dolphins and whales are completely dependent on the marine environment for all stages of their life; seals feed in the ocean but breed on land; and polar bears must feed on land.
The cetaceans became aquatic around 50 million years ago (mya). Based on molecular and morphological research, the cetaceans genetically and morphologically fall firmly within the Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates). The term "Cetartiodactyla" reflects the idea that whales evolved within the ungulates. The term was coined by merging the name for the two orders, Cetacea and Artiodactyla, into a single word. Under this definition, the closest living land relative of the whales and dolphins is thought to be the hippopotamuses.
Sirenians, the sea cows, became aquatic around 40 million years ago. The first appearance of sirenians in the fossil record was during the early Eocene, and by the late Eocene, sirenians had significantly diversified. Inhabitants of rivers, estuaries, and nearshore marine waters, they were able to spread rapidly. The most primitive sirenian, †Prorastomus, was found in Jamaica, unlike other marine mammals which originated from the Old World (such as cetaceans). The first known quadrupedal sirenian was †Pezosiren from the early middle Eocene. The earliest known sea cows, of the families †Prorastomidae and †Protosirenidae, were both confined to the Eocene, and were pig-sized, four-legged, amphibious creatures. The first members of Dugongidae appeared by the middle Eocene. At this point, sea cows were fully aquatic.
Pinnipeds split from other caniforms 50 mya during the Eocene. Their evolutionary link to terrestrial mammals was unknown until the 2007 discovery of †Puijila darwini in early Miocene deposits in Nunavut, Canada. Like a modern otter, †Puijila had a long tail, short limbs and webbed feet instead of flippers. The lineages of Otariidae (eared seals) and Odobenidae (walrus) split almost 28 mya. Phocids (earless seals) are known to have existed for at least 15 mya, and molecular evidence supports a divergence of the Monachinae (monk seals) and Phocinae lineages 22 mya.
Fossil evidence indicates the sea otter (Enhydra) lineage became isolated in the North Pacific approximately two mya, giving rise to the now-extinct †Enhydra macrodonta and the modern sea otter, Enhydra lutris. The sea otter evolved initially in northern Hokkaidō and Russia, and then spread east to the Aleutian Islands, mainland Alaska, and down the North American coast. In comparison to cetaceans, sirenians, and pinnipeds, which entered the water approximately 50, 40, and 20 mya, respectively, the sea otter is a relative newcomer to marine life. In some respects though, the sea otter is more fully adapted to water than pinnipeds, which must haul out on land or ice to give birth.
Polar bears are thought to have diverged from a population of brown bears, Ursus arctos, that became isolated during a period of glaciation in the Pleistocene or from the eastern part of Siberia, (from Kamchatka and the Kolym Peninsula). The oldest known polar bear fossil is a 130,000-to-110,000-year-old jaw bone, found on Prince Charles Foreland in 2004. The mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) of the polar bear diverged from the brown bear roughly 150,000 years ago. Further, some clades of brown bear, as assessed by their mtDNA, are more closely related to polar bears than to other brown bears, meaning that the polar bear might not be considered a species under some species concepts.
In general, terrestrial amniote invasions of the sea have become more frequent in the Cenozoic than they were in the Mesozoic. Factors contributing to this trend include the increasing productivity of near-shore marine environments, and the role of endothermy in facilitating this transition.
Distribution and habitat
Marine mammals are widely distributed throughout the globe, but their distribution is patchy and coincides with the productivity of the oceans. Species richness peaks at around 40° latitude, both north and south. This corresponds to the highest levels of primary production around North and South America, Africa, Asia and Australia. Total species range is highly variable for marine mammal species. On average most marine mammals have ranges which are equivalent or smaller than one-fifth of the Indian Ocean. The variation observed in range size is a result of the different ecological requirements of each species and their ability to cope with a broad range of environmental conditions. The high degree of overlap between marine mammal species richness and areas of human impact on the environment is of concern.
Most marine mammals, such as seals and sea otters, inhabit the coast. Seals, however, also use a number of terrestrial habitats, both continental and island. In temperate and tropical areas, they haul-out on to sandy and pebble beaches, rocky shores, shoals, mud flats, tide pools and in sea caves. Some species also rest on man-made structures, like piers, jetties, buoys and oil platforms. Seals may move further inland and rest in sand dunes or vegetation, and may even climb cliffs. Most cetaceans live in the open ocean, and species like the sperm whale may dive to depths of −1,000 to −2,500 feet (−300 to −760 m) in search of food. Sirenians live in shallow coastal waters, usually living 30 feet (9.1 m) below sea level. However, they have been known to dive to −120 feet (−37 m) to forage deep-water seagrasses. Sea otters live in protected areas, such as rocky shores, kelp forests, and barrier reefs, although they may reside among drift ice or in sandy, muddy, or silty areas.
Many marine mammals seasonally migrate. Annual ice contains areas of water that appear and disappear throughout the year as the weather changes, and seals migrate in response to these changes. In turn, polar bears must follow their prey. In Hudson Bay, James Bay, and some other areas, the ice melts completely each summer (an event often referred to as "ice-floe breakup"), forcing polar bears to go onto land and wait through the months until the next freeze-up. In the Chukchi and Beaufort seas, polar bears retreat each summer to the ice further north that remains frozen year-round. Seals may also migrate to other environmental changes, such as El Niño, and traveling seals may use various features of their environment to reach their destination including geomagnetic fields, water and wind currents, the position of the sun and moon and the taste and temperature of the water. Baleen whales famously migrate very long distances into tropical waters to give birth and raise young, possibly to prevent predation by killer whales. The gray whale has the longest recorded migration of any mammal, with one traveling 14,000 miles (23,000 km) from the Sea of Okhotsk to the Baja Peninsula. During the winter, manatees living at the northern end of their range migrate to warmer waters.
Adaptations
Marine mammals have a number of physiological and anatomical features to overcome the unique challenges associated with aquatic living. Some of these features are very species-specific. Marine mammals have developed a number of features for efficient locomotion such as torpedo-shaped bodies to reduce drag; modified limbs for propulsion and steering; tail flukes and dorsal fins for propulsion and balance. Marine mammals are adept at thermoregulation using dense fur or blubber, circulatory adjustments (counter-current heat exchange); and reduced appendages, and large size to prevent heat loss.
Marine mammals are able to dive for long periods. Both pinnipeds and cetaceans have large and complex blood vessel systems pushing large volumes of blood rich in myoglobin and hemoglobin, which serve to store greater quantities of oxygen. Other important reservoirs include muscles and the spleen which all have the capacity to hold a high concentration of oxygen. They are also capable of bradycardia (reduced heart rate), and vasoconstriction (shunting most of the oxygen to vital organs such as the brain and heart) to allow extended diving times and cope with oxygen deprivation. If oxygen is depleted (hypoxia), marine mammals can access substantial reservoirs of glycogen that support anaerobic glycolysis.
Sound travels differently through water, and therefore marine mammals have developed adaptations to ensure effective communication, prey capture, and predator detection. The most notable adaptation is the development of echolocation in whales and dolphins. Toothed whales emit a focused beam of high-frequency clicks in the direction that their head is pointing. Sounds are generated by passing air from the bony nares through the phonic lips. These sounds are reflected by the dense concave bone of the cranium and an air sac at its base. The focused beam is modulated by a large fatty organ known as the 'melon'. This acts like an acoustic lens because it is composed of lipids of differing densities.
Marine mammals have evolved a wide variety of features for feeding, which are mainly seen in their dentition. For example, the cheek teeth of pinnipeds and odontocetes are specifically adapted to capture fish and squid. In contrast, baleen whales have evolved baleen plates to filter feed plankton and small fish from the water.
Polar bears, otters, and fur seals have long, oily, and waterproof fur in order to trap air to provide insulation. In contrast, other marine mammals—such as whales, dolphins, porpoises, manatees, dugongs, and walruses—have lost long fur in favor of a thick, dense epidermis and a thickened fat layer (blubber) to prevent drag. Wading and bottom-feeding animals (such as manatees) need to be heavier than water in order to keep contact with the floor or to stay submerged. Surface-living animals (such as sea otters) need the opposite, and free-swimming animals living in open waters (such as dolphins) need to be neutrally buoyant in order to be able to swim up and down the water column. Typically, thick and dense bone is found in bottom feeders and low bone density is associated with mammals living in deep water. Some marine mammals, such as polar bears and otters, have retained four weight-bearing limbs and can walk on land like fully terrestrial animals.
EcologyDietary
All cetaceans are carnivorous and predatory. Toothed whales mostly feed on fish and cephalopods, followed by crustaceans and bivalves. Some may forage with other kinds of animals, such as other species of whales or certain species of pinnipeds. One common feeding method is herding, where a pod squeezes a school of fish into a small volume, known as a bait ball. Individual members then take turns plowing through the ball, feeding on the stunned fish. Coralling is a method where dolphins chase fish into shallow water to catch them more easily. Orcas and bottlenose dolphins have also been known to drive their prey onto a beach to feed on it. Killer whales have been known to paralyze great white sharks and other sharks and rays by flipping them upside down. Other whales with a blunt snout and reduced dentition rely on suction feeding. Though carnivorous, they house gut flora similar to that of terrestrial herbivores, probably a remnant of their herbivorous ancestry.
Baleen whales use their baleen plates to sieve plankton, among others, out of the water; there are two types of methods: lunge-feeding and gulp-feeding. Lunge-feeders expand the volume of their jaw to a volume bigger than the original volume of the whale itself by inflating their mouth. This causes grooves on their throat to expand, increasing the amount of water the mouth can store. They ram a baitball at high speeds in order to feed, but this is only energy-effective when used against a large baitball. Gulp-feeders swim with an open mouth, filling it with water and prey. Prey must occur in sufficient numbers to trigger the whale's interest, be within a certain size range so that the baleen plates can filter it, and be slow enough so that it cannot escape.

Otters are the only marine animals that are capable of lifting and turning over rocks, which they often do with their front paws when searching for prey. The sea otter may pluck snails and other organisms from kelp and dig deep into underwater mud for clams. It is the only marine mammal that catches fish with its forepaws rather than with its teeth. Under each foreleg, sea otters have a loose pouch of skin that extends across the chest which they use to store collected food to bring to the surface. This pouch also holds a rock that is used to break open shellfish and clams, an example of tool use. The sea otters eat while floating on their backs, using their forepaws to tear food apart and bring to their mouths. Marine otters mainly feed on crustaceans and fish.
Pinnipeds mostly feed on fish and cephalopods, followed by crustaceans and bivalves, and then zooplankton and warm-blooded prey (like sea birds). Most species are generalist feeders, but a few are specialists. They typically hunt non-schooling fish, slow-moving or immobile invertebrates or endothermic prey when in groups. Solitary foraging species usually exploit coastal waters, bays and rivers. When large schools of fish or squid are available, pinnipeds hunt cooperatively in large groups, locating and herding their prey. Some species, such as California and South American sea lions, may forage with cetaceans and sea birds.
The polar bear is the most carnivorous species of bear, and its diet primarily consists of ringed (Pusa hispida) and bearded (Erignathus barbatus) seals. Polar bears hunt primarily at the interface between ice, water, and air; they only rarely catch seals on land or in open water. The polar bear's most common hunting method is still-hunting: The bear locates a seal breathing hole using its sense of smell, and crouches nearby for a seal to appear. When the seal exhales, the bear smells its breath, reaches into the hole with a forepaw, and drags it out onto the ice. The polar bear also hunts by stalking seals resting on the ice. Upon spotting a seal, it walks to within 100 yards (90 m), and then crouches. If the seal does not notice, the bear creeps to within 30 to 40 feet (9 to 10 m) of the seal and then suddenly rushes to attack. A third hunting method is to raid the birth lairs that female seals create in the snow. They may also feed on fish.

Sirenians are referred to as "sea cows" because their diet consists mainly of seagrass. When eating, they ingest the whole plant, including the roots, although when this is impossible they feed on just the leaves. A wide variety of seagrass has been found in dugong stomach contents, and evidence exists they will eat algae when seagrass is scarce. West Indian manatees eat up to 60 different species of plants, as well as fish and small invertebrates to a lesser extent.
Keystone species
Sea otters are a classic example of a keystone species; their presence affects the ecosystem more profoundly than their size and numbers would suggest. They keep the population of certain benthic (sea floor) herbivores, particularly sea urchins, in check. Sea urchins graze on the lower stems of kelp, causing the kelp to drift away and die. Loss of the habitat and nutrients provided by kelp forests leads to profound cascade effects on the marine ecosystem. North Pacific areas that do not have sea otters often turn into urchin barrens, with abundant sea urchins and no kelp forest. Reintroduction of sea otters to British Columbia has led to a dramatic improvement in the health of coastal ecosystems, and similar changes have been observed as sea otter populations recovered in the Aleutian and Commander Islands and the Big Sur coast of California. However, some kelp forest ecosystems in California have also thrived without sea otters, with sea urchin populations apparently controlled by other factors. The role of sea otters in maintaining kelp forests has been observed to be more important in areas of open coast than in more protected bays and estuaries.

An apex predator affects prey population dynamics and defense tactics (such as camouflage). The polar bear is the apex predator within its range. Several animal species, particularly Arctic foxes (Vulpes lagopus) and glaucous gulls (Larus hyperboreus), routinely scavenge polar bear kills. The relationship between ringed seals and polar bears is so close that the abundance of ringed seals in some areas appears to regulate the density of polar bears, while polar bear predation in turn regulates density and reproductive success of ringed seals. The evolutionary pressure of polar bear predation on seals probably accounts for some significant differences between Arctic and Antarctic seals. Compared to the Antarctic, where there is no major surface predator, Arctic seals use more breathing holes per individual, appear more restless when hauled out on the ice, and rarely defecate on the ice. The fur of Arctic pups is white, presumably to provide camouflage from predators, whereas Antarctic pups all have dark fur.
Killer whales are apex predators throughout their global distribution, and can have a profound effect on the behavior and population of prey species. Their diet is very broad and they can feed on many vertebrates in the ocean including salmon, rays, sharks (even white sharks), large baleen whales, and nearly 20 species of pinniped. The predation of whale calves may be responsible for annual whale migrations to calving grounds in more tropical waters, where the population of killer whales is much lower than in polar waters. Prior to whaling, it is thought that great whales were a major food source; however, after their sharp decline, killer whales have since expanded their diet, leading to the decline of smaller marine mammals. A decline in Aleutian Islands sea otter populations in the 1990s was controversially attributed by some scientists to killer whale predation, although with no direct evidence. The decline of sea otters followed a decline in harbor seal and Steller sea lion populations, the killer whale's preferred prey, which in turn may be substitutes for their original prey, now reduced by industrial whaling.
Whale pump
A 2010 study considered whales to be a positive influence to the productivity of ocean fisheries, in what has been termed a "whale pump". Whales carry nutrients such as nitrogen from the depths back to the surface. This functions as an upward biological pump, reversing an earlier presumption that whales accelerate the loss of nutrients to the bottom. This nitrogen input in the Gulf of Maine is more than the input of all rivers combined emptying into the gulf, some 25,000 short tons (23,000 t) each year.
Whales defecate at the ocean's surface; their excrement is important for fisheries because it is rich in iron and nitrogen. The whale feces are liquid and instead of sinking, they stay at the surface where phytoplankton feed off it.
Upon death, whale carcasses fall to the deep ocean and provide a substantial habitat for marine life. Evidence of whale falls in present-day and fossil records shows that deep-sea whale falls support a rich assemblage of creatures, with a global diversity of 407 species, comparable to other neritic biodiversity hotspots, such as cold seeps and hydrothermal vents. Deterioration of whale carcasses happens through a series of three stages. Initially, moving organisms, such as sharks and hagfish, scavenge soft tissue at a rapid rate over a period of months to as long as two years. This is followed by the colonization of bones and surrounding sediments (which contain organic matter) by enrichment opportunists, such as crustaceans and polychaetes, throughout a period of years. Finally, sulfophilic bacteria reduce the bones releasing hydrogen sulphide enabling the growth of chemoautotrophic organisms, which in turn, support other organisms such as mussels, clams, limpets, and sea snails. This stage may last for decades and supports a rich assemblage of species, averaging 185 species per site.
Interactions with humansThreats
Due to the difficulty to survey populations, 38% of marine mammals are data deficient, especially around the Antarctic Polar Front. In particular, declines in the populations of completely marine mammals tend to go unnoticed 70% of the time.
Exploitation
Marine mammals were hunted by coastal aboriginal humans historically for food and other resources. These subsistence hunts still occur in Canada, Greenland, Indonesia, Russia, the United States, and several nations in the Caribbean. The effects of these are only localized, as hunting efforts were on a relatively small scale. Commercial hunting took this to a much greater scale and marine mammals were heavily exploited. This led to the extinction of the Steller's sea cow (Hydrodamalis gigas), sea mink (Neogale macrodon), Japanese sea lion (Zalophus japonicus), and the Caribbean monk seal (Neomonachus tropicalis). Today, populations of species that were historically hunted, such as blue whales (Balaenoptera musculus) and the North Pacific right whale (Eubalaena japonica), are much lower than their pre-whaling levels. Because whales generally have slow growth rates, are slow to reach sexual maturity, and have a low reproductive output, population recovery has been very slow.
A number of whales are still subject to direct hunting, despite the 1986 moratorium on commercial whaling set under the terms of the International Whaling Commission (IWC). There are only two nations remaining which sanction commercial whaling: Norway, where several hundred common minke whales are harvested each year; and Iceland, where quotas of 150 fin whales and 100 minke whales per year are set. Japan also harvests several hundred Antarctic and North Pacific minke whales each year, ostensibly for scientific research in accordance with the moratorium. However, the illegal trade of whale and dolphin meat is a significant market in Japan and some countries.

The most profitable furs in the fur trade were those of sea otters, especially the northern sea otter which inhabited the coastal waters between the Columbia River to the south and Cook Inlet to the north. The fur of the Californian southern sea otter was less highly prized and thus less profitable. After the northern sea otter was hunted to local extinction, maritime fur traders shifted to California until the southern sea otter was likewise nearly extinct. The British and American maritime fur traders took their furs to the Chinese port of Guangzhou (Canton), where they worked within the established Canton System. Furs from Russian America were mostly sold to China via the Mongolian trading town of Kyakhta, which had been opened to Russian trade by the 1727 Treaty of Kyakhta.
Commercial sealing was historically just as important as the whaling industry. Exploited species included harp seals, hooded seals, Caspian seals, elephant seals, walruses and all species of fur seal. The scale of seal harvesting decreased substantially after the 1960s, after the Canadian government reduced the length of the hunting season and implemented measures to protect adult females. Several species that were commercially exploited have rebounded in numbers; for example, Antarctic fur seals may be as numerous as they were prior to harvesting. The northern elephant seal was hunted to near extinction in the late 19th century, with only a small population remaining on Guadalupe Island. It has since recolonized much of its historic range, but has a population bottleneck. Conversely, the Mediterranean monk seal was extirpated from much of its former range, which stretched from the Mediterranean to the Black Sea and northwest Africa, and remains only in the northeastern Mediterranean and some parts of northwest Africa.
Polar bears can be hunted for sport in Canada with a special permit and accompaniment by a local guide. This can be an important source of income for small communities, as guided hunts bring in more income than selling the polar bear hide on markets. The United States, Russia, Norway, Greenland, and Canada allow subsistence hunting, and Canada distributes hunting permits to indigenous communities. The selling of these permits is a main source of income for many of these communities. Their hides can be used for subsistence purposes, kept as hunting trophies, or can be bought in markets.
Ocean traffic and fisheries
By-catch is the incidental capture of non-target species in fisheries. Fixed and drift gill nets cause the highest mortality levels for both cetaceans and pinnipeds, however, entanglements in long lines, mid-water trawls, and both trap and pot lines are also common. Tuna seines are particularly problematic for entanglement by dolphins. By-catch affects all cetaceans, both small and big, in all habitat types. However, smaller cetaceans and pinnipeds are most vulnerable as their size means that escape once they are entangled is highly unlikely and they frequently drown. While larger cetaceans are capable of dragging nets with them, the nets sometimes remain tightly attached to the individual and can impede the animal from feeding sometimes leading to starvation. Abandoned or lost nets and lines cause mortality through ingestion or entanglement. Marine mammals also get entangled in aquaculture nets, however, these are rare events and not prevalent enough to impact populations.
Vessel strikes cause death for a number of marine mammals, especially whales. In particular, fast commercial vessels such as container ships can cause major injuries or death when they collide with marine mammals. Collisions occur both with large commercial vessels and recreational boats and cause injury to whales or smaller cetaceans. The critically endangered North Atlantic right whale is particularly affected by vessel strikes. Tourism boats designed for whale and dolphin watching can also negatively impact on marine mammals by interfering with their natural behavior.
The fishery industry not only threatens marine mammals through by-catch, but also through competition for food. Large-scale fisheries have led to the depletion of fish stocks that are important prey species for marine mammals. Pinnipeds have been especially affected by the direct loss of food supplies and in some cases the harvesting of fish has led to food shortages or dietary deficiencies, starvation of young, and reduced recruitment into the population. As the fish stocks have been depleted, the competition between marine mammals and fisheries has sometimes led to conflict. Large-scale culling of populations of marine mammals by commercial fishers has been initiated in a number of areas in order to protect fish stocks for human consumption.
Shellfish aquaculture takes up space so in effect creates competition for space. However, there is little direct competition for aquaculture shellfish harvest. On the other hand, marine mammals regularly take finfish from farms, which creates significant problems for marine farmers. While there are usually legal mechanisms designed to deter marine mammals, such as anti-predator nets or harassment devices, individuals are often illegally shot.
Habitat loss and degradation
Habitat degradation is caused by a number of human activities. Marine mammals that live in coastal environments are the most likely to be affected by habitat degradation and loss. Developments such as sewage marine outfalls, moorings, dredging, blasting, dumping, port construction, hydroelectric projects, and aquaculture both degrade the environment and take up valuable habitat. For example, extensive shellfish aquaculture takes up valuable space used by coastal marine mammals for important activities such as breeding, foraging and resting.
Contaminants that are discharged into the marine environment accumulate in the bodies of marine mammals when they are stored unintentionally in their blubber along with energy. Contaminants that are found in the tissues of marine mammals include heavy metals, such as mercury and lead, but also organochlorides and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. For example, these can cause disruptive effects on endocrine systems; impair the reproductive system, and lower the immune system of individuals, leading to a higher number of deaths. Other pollutants such as oil, plastic debris and sewage threaten the livelihood of marine mammals.
Noise pollution from anthropogenic activities is another major concern for marine mammals. This is a problem because underwater noise pollution interferes with the abilities of some marine mammals to communicate, and locate both predators and prey. Underwater explosions are used for a variety of purposes including military activities, construction and oceanographic or geophysical research. They can cause injuries such as hemorrhaging of the lungs, and contusion and ulceration of the gastrointestinal tract. Underwater noise is generated from shipping, the oil and gas industry, research, and military use of sonar and oceanographic acoustic experimentation. Acoustic harassment devices and acoustic deterrent devices used by aquaculture facilities to scare away marine mammals emit loud and noxious underwater sounds.
Two changes to the global atmosphere due to anthropogenic activity threaten marine mammals. The first is increases in ultraviolet radiation due to ozone depletion, and this mainly affects the Antarctic and other areas of the Southern Hemisphere. An increase in ultraviolet radiation has the capacity to decrease phytoplankton abundance, which forms the basis of the food chain in the ocean. The second effect of global climate change is global warming due to increased carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere. Raised sea levels, rising sea temperatures and changed currents are expected to affect marine mammals by altering the distribution of important prey species, and changing the suitability of breeding sites and migratory routes. The Arctic food chain would be disrupted by the near extinction or migration of polar bears. Arctic sea ice is the polar bear's habitat. It has been declining at a rate of 13% per decade because the temperature is rising at twice the rate of the rest of the world. By the year 2050, up to two-thirds of the world's polar bears may vanish if the sea ice continues to melt at its current rate.
A study by evolutionary biologists at the University of Pittsburgh showed that the ancestors of many marine mammals stopped producing a certain enzyme that today protects against some neurotoxic chemicals called organophosphates, including those found in the widely used pesticides chlorpyrifos and diazinon. Marine mammals may be increasingly exposed to these compounds due to agricultural runoff reaching the world's oceans.
Protection
The Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 (MMPA) was passed on October 21, 1972, under president Richard Nixon to prevent the further depletion and possible extinction of marine mammal stocks. It prohibits the taking ("the act of hunting, killing, capture, and/or harassment of any marine mammal; or, the attempt at such") of any marine mammal without a permit issued by the Secretary. Authority to manage the MMPA was divided between the Secretary of the Interior through the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service), and the Secretary of Commerce, which is delegated to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The Marine Mammal Commission (MMC) was established to review existing policies and make recommendations to the Service and NOAA to better implement the MMPA. The Service is responsible for ensuring the protection of sea otters and marine otters, walruses, polar bears, the three species of manatees, and dugongs; and NOAA was given responsibility to conserve and manage pinnipeds (excluding walruses) and cetaceans.
The Act was updated on 1 January 2016 with a clause banning "the import of fish from fisheries that cannot prove they meet US standards for protecting marine mammals". The requirement to show that protection standards are met is hoped to compel countries exporting fish to the US to more strictly control their fisheries that no protected marine mammals are adversely affected by fishing.
The 1979 Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS) is the only global organization that conserves a broad range of animals, which includes marine mammals. Of the agreements made, three of them deal with the conservation of marine mammals: ACCOBAMS, ASCOBANS and the Wadden Sea Agreement. In 1982, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) adopted a pollution prevention approach to conservation, which many other conventions at the time also adopted.

The Agreement on the Conservation of Cetaceans in the Black Sea, Mediterranean Sea and contiguous Atlantic area (ACCOBAMS), founded in 1996, specifically protects cetaceans in the Mediterranean area, and "maintains a favorable status", a direct action against whaling. There are 23 member states.
The Agreement on the Conservation of Small Cetaceans of the Baltic and North Seas (ASCOBANS) was adopted alongside ACCOBAMS to establish a special protection area for Europe's increasingly threatened cetaceans. Other anti-whaling efforts include a ten-year moratorium in 1986 by the IWC on all whaling, and an environmental agreement (a type of international law) the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling which controlled commercial, scientific and subsistence whaling.
The Agreement on the Conservation of Seals in the Wadden Sea, enforced in 1991, prohibits the killing or harassment of seals in the Wadden Sea, specifically targeting the harbor seal population.
The 1973 Agreement on the Conservation of Polar Bears between Canada, Denmark (Greenland), Norway (Svalbard), the United States and the Soviet Union outlawed the unregulated hunting of polar bears from aircraft and icebreakers, as well as protecting migration, feeding and hibernation sites.
Various non-governmental organizations participate in marine conservation activism, wherein they draw attention to and aid in various problems in marine conservation, such as pollution, whaling, bycatch, and so forth. Notable organizations include the Greenpeace who focus on overfishing and whaling among other things, and Sea Shepherd Conservation Society who are known for taking direct-action tactics to expose illegal activity.
As food
For thousands of years, indigenous peoples of the Arctic have depended on whale meat and seal meat. The meat is harvested from legal, non-commercial hunts that occur twice a year in the spring and autumn. The meat is stored and eaten throughout the winter. The skin and blubber (muktuk) taken from the bowhead, beluga, or narwhal is also valued, and is eaten raw or cooked. Whaling has also been practiced in the Faroe Islands in the North Atlantic since about the time of the first Norse settlements on the islands. Around 1,000 long-finned pilot whales are still killed annually, mainly during the summer. Today, dolphin meat is consumed in a small number of countries worldwide, which include Japan and Peru (where it is referred to as chancho marino, or "sea pork"). In some parts of the world, such as Taiji (in Japan) and the Faroe Islands, dolphins are traditionally considered food, and are killed in harpoon or drive hunts.
There have been human health concerns associated with the consumption of dolphin meat in Japan after tests showed that dolphin meat contained high levels of methylmercury. There are no known cases of mercury poisoning as a result of consuming dolphin meat, though the government continues to monitor people in areas where dolphin meat consumption is high. The Japanese government recommends that children and pregnant women avoid eating dolphin meat on a regular basis. Similar concerns exist with the consumption of dolphin meat in the Faroe Islands, where prenatal exposure to methylmercury and PCBs primarily from the consumption of pilot whale meat has resulted in neuropsychological deficits amongst children.

The Faroe Islands population was exposed to methylmercury largely from contaminated pilot whale meat, which contained very high levels of about 2 mg methylmercury/kg. However, the Faroe Islands populations also eat significant amounts of fish. The study of about 900 Faroese children showed that prenatal exposure to methylmercury resulted in neuropsychological deficits at 7 years of age
Ringed seals were once the main food staple for the Inuit. They are still an important food source for the people of Nunavut and are also hunted and eaten in Alaska. Seal meat is an important source of food for residents of small coastal communities. The seal blubber is used to make seal oil, which is marketed as a fish oil supplement. In 2001, two percent of Canada's raw seal oil was processed and sold in Canadian health stores.
In captivityAquariumsCetaceans
Various species of dolphins are kept in captivity. These small cetaceans are more often than not kept in theme parks and dolphinariums, such as SeaWorld. Bottlenose dolphins are the most common species of dolphin kept in dolphinariums as they are relatively easy to train and have a long lifespan in captivity. Hundreds of bottlenose dolphins live in captivity across the world, though exact numbers are hard to determine. The dolphin "smile" makes them popular attractions, as this is a welcoming facial expression in humans; however, the smile is due to a lack of facial muscles and subsequent lack of facial expressions.
Organizations such as World Animal Protection and the Whale and Dolphin Conservation campaign against the practice of keeping cetaceans, particularly killer whales, in captivity. In captivity, they often develop pathologies, such as the dorsal fin collapse seen in 60–90% of male killer whales. Captives have vastly reduced life expectancies, on average only living into their twenties. In the wild, females who survive infancy live 46 years on average, and up to 70–80 years in rare cases. Wild males who survive infancy live 31 years on average, and up to 50–60 years. Captivity usually bears little resemblance to wild habitat, and captive whales' social groups are foreign to those found in the wild. Captive life is also stressful due to the requirement to perform circus tricks that are not part of wild killer whale behavior, as well as restricting pool size. Wild killer whales may travel up to 100 miles (160 km) in a day, and critics say the animals are too big and intelligent to be suitable for captivity. Captives occasionally act aggressively towards themselves, their tankmates, or humans, which critics say is a result of stress. Dolphins are often trained to do several anthropomorphic behaviors, including waving and kissing—behaviors wild dolphins would rarely do.
Pinnipeds
The large size and playfulness of pinnipeds make them popular attractions. Some exhibits have rocky backgrounds with artificial haul-out sites and a pool, while others have pens with small rocky, elevated shelters where the animals can dive into their pools. More elaborate exhibits contain deep pools that can be viewed underwater with rock-mimicking cement as haul-out areas. The most common pinniped species kept in captivity is the California sea lion as it is abundant and easy to train. These animals are used to perform tricks and entertain visitors. Other species popularly kept in captivity include the grey seal and harbor seal. Larger animals like walruses and Steller sea lions are much less common. Pinnipeds are popular attractions because they are "disneyfied", and consequently, people often anthropomorphize them with a curious, funny, or playful nature.
Some organizations, such as the Humane Society of the United States and World Animal Protection, object to keeping pinnipeds and other marine mammals in captivity. They state that the exhibits could not be large enough to house animals that have evolved to be migratory, and a pool could never replace the size and biodiversity of the ocean. They also oppose using sea lions for entertainment, claiming the tricks performed are "exaggerated variations of their natural behaviors" and distract the audience from the animal's unnatural environment.
Sea otter
Sea otters can do well in captivity, and are featured in over 40 public aquariums and zoos. The Seattle Aquarium became the first institution to raise sea otters from conception to adulthood with the birth of Tichuk in 1979, followed by three more pups in the early 1980s. In 2007, a YouTube video of two cute sea otters holding paws drew 1.5 million viewers in two weeks, and had over 20 million views as of January 2015. Filmed five years previously at the Vancouver Aquarium, it was YouTube's most popular animal video at the time, although it has since been surpassed. Otters are often viewed as having a "happy family life", but this is an anthropomorphism.
Sirenians
The oldest manatee in captivity was Snooty, at the South Florida Museum's Parker Manatee Aquarium in Bradenton, Florida. Born at the Miami Aquarium and Tackle Company on July 21, 1948, Snooty was one of the first recorded captive manatee births. He was raised entirely in captivity, and died at the age of 69. Manatees can also be viewed in a number of European zoos, such as the Tierpark in Berlin, the Nuremberg Zoo, in ZooParc de Beauval in France, and in the Aquarium of Genoa in Italy. The River Safari at Singapore features seven of them.
Military
Bottlenose dolphins and California sea lions are used in the United States Navy Marine Mammal Program (NMMP) to detect mines, protect ships from enemy soldiers, and recover objects. The Navy has never trained attack dolphins, as they would not be able to discern allied soldiers from enemy soldiers. There were five marine mammal teams, each purposed for one of the three tasks: MK4 (dolphins), MK5 (sea lions), MK6 (dolphins and sea lions), MK7 (dolphins) and MK8 (dolphins); MK is short for mark. The dolphin teams were trained to detect and mark mines either attached to the seafloor or floating in the water column, because dolphins can use their echolocative abilities to detect mines. The sea lion team retrieved test equipment such as fake mines or bombs dropped from planes usually out of reach of divers who would have to make multiple dives. MK6 protects harbors and ships from enemy divers, and was operational in the Gulf War and Vietnam War. The dolphins would swim up behind enemy divers and attach a buoy to their air tank, so that they would float to the surface and alert nearby Navy personnel. Sea lions would hand-cuff the enemy, and try to outmaneuver their counter-attacks.
The use of marine mammals by the Navy, even in accordance with the Navy's policy, continues to meet opposition. The Navy's policy says that only positive reinforcement is to be used while training the military dolphins, and that they be cared for in accordance with accepted standards in animal care. The inevitable stresses involved in training are topics of controversy, as their treatment is unlike the animals' natural lifestyle, especially towards their confined spaces when not training. There is also controversy over the use of muzzles and other inhibitors, which prevent the dolphins from foraging for food while working. The Navy states that this is to prevent them from ingesting harmful objects, but conservation activists say this is done to reinforce the trainers' control over the dolphins, who hand out food rewards. The means of transportation is also an issue for conservation activists, since they are hauled in dry carriers, and switching tanks and introducing the dolphin to new dolphins is potentially dangerous as they are territorial.


Mammal  is a 2016 Irish-Luxembourgish-Dutch drama film directed by Rebecca Daly, who co-wrote the screenplay with Glenn Montgomery. Starring Rachel Griffiths and Barry Keoghan, the cast also includes Michael McElhatton, Nika McGuigan, and Johnny Ward in supporting roles. It was shown in the World Cinema Dramatic Competition section at the 2016 Sundance Film Festival.
Cast
Rachel Griffiths as Margaret
Barry Keoghan as Joe
Michael McElhatton as Matt
Nika McGuigan as Ann Marie
Johnny Ward as Sully
Joanne Crawford as Jean Cunningham
Aoife King as Claire
Rachel O'Byrne as Lucinda
Reception
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 75% based on 8 reviews, with an average rating of 6.6/10.


Menstruation  is the shedding of the uterine lining (endometrium) in some mammals.  It occurs on a regular basis in uninseminated sexually reproductive-age females of certain mammal species.
Although there is some disagreement in definitions between sources, menstruation is generally considered to be limited to primates. It is common in simians (Old World monkeys, New World monkeys, and apes), but completely lacking in strepsirrhine primates and possibly weakly present in tarsiers. Beyond primates, it is known only in bats, the elephant shrew, and the spiny mouse species Acomys cahirinus. Overt menstruation (where there is bleeding from the uterus through the vagina) is found primarily in humans and close relatives such as chimpanzees.
Females of other species of placental mammals undergo estrous cycles, in which the endometrium is completely reabsorbed by the animal (covert menstruation) at the end of its reproductive cycle. Many zoologists regard this as different from "true" menstrual cycle. Female domestic animals used for breeding—for example dogs, pigs, cattle, or horses—are monitored for physical signs of an estrous cycle period, which indicates that the animal is ready for insemination.
Estrus and menstruation
Females of most mammal species advertise fertility to males with visual behavioral cues, pheromones, or both. This period of advertised fertility is known as oestrus, "estrus" or heat. In species that experience estrus, females are generally only receptive to copulation while they are in heat (dolphins are an exception). In the estrous cycles of most placentals, if no fertilization takes place, the uterus reabsorbs the endometrium. This breakdown of the endometrium without vaginal discharge is sometimes called covert menstruation. Overt menstruation (where there is blood flow from the vagina) occurs primarily in humans and close evolutionary relatives such as chimpanzees. Some species, such as domestic dogs, experience small amounts of vaginal bleeding while approaching heat; this discharge has a different physiologic cause than menstruation.
Concealed ovulation
A few mammals do not experience obvious, visible signs of fertility (concealed ovulation). In humans, studies show that both males and females can detect the fertility of females through hormonal signaling and alterations in scent (fertility awareness), but some research suggests that behavioral clues may be needed to consciously assess fertility.
Orangutans also lack visible signs of impending ovulation. Also, it has been said that the extended estrus period of the bonobo (reproductive-age females are in heat for 75% of their menstrual cycle) has a similar effect to the lack of a "heat" in human females.
Evolution
Most female mammals have an estrous cycle, yet only some primate and bat species, the elephant shrew, and one known species of spiny mouse have a menstrual cycle. As these groups are not closely related, it is likely that four distinct evolutionary events have caused menstruation to arise.
There are varying views on evolution of overt menstruation in humans and related species, and the evolutionary advantages in losing blood associated with dismantling the uterine lining rather than absorbing it, as most mammals do. The reason is likely related to differences in the ovulation process.
Most female placentals have a uterine lining that builds up when the animal begins ovulation, and later further increases in thickness and blood flow after a fertilized egg has successfully implanted. This final process of thickening is known as decidualization, and is usually triggered by hormones released by the embryo. In humans, decidualization happens spontaneously at the beginning of each menstrual cycle, triggered by hormonal signals from the ovaries. For this reason, the human uterine lining becomes fully thickened during each cycle as a defense to trophoblast penetration of the endometrial wall, regardless of whether an egg becomes fertilized or successfully implants in the uterus. This produces more unneeded material per cycle than in non-menstruating mammals, which may explain why the extra material is not simply reabsorbed as done by those species. In essence, menstruating animals treat every cycle as a possible pregnancy by thickening the protective layer around the endometrial wall, while non-menstruating placental mammals do not begin the pregnancy process until a fertilized egg has implanted in the uterine wall.
For this reason, it is speculated that menstruation is a side effect of spontaneous decidualization, which evolved in some placental mammals due to its advantages over non-spontaneous decidualization. Spontaneous decidualization allows for more maternal control in the maternal-fetal conflict by increasing selectivity over the implanted embryo. This may be necessary in humans and other primates, due to the abnormally large number of genetic disorders in these species. Since most aneuploidy events result in stillbirth or miscarriage, there is an evolutionary advantage to ending the pregnancy early, rather than nurturing a fetus that will later miscarry. There is evidence to show that some abnormalities in the developing embryo can be detected by endometrial stromal cells in the uterus, but only upon differentiation into decidual cells. This triggers epigenetic changes that prevent formation of the placenta, which prevents the embryo from implanting and leaves it to be removed in the next menstruation. This failsafe mode is not possible in species where decidualization is controlled by hormonal triggers from the embryo. This is sometimes referred to as the choosy uterus theory, and it is theorized that this positive outweighs the negative impacts of menstruation in species with high aneuploidy rates and hence a high number of 'doomed' embryos.
Animal estrous cycles
The female will ovulate spontaneously and be receptive to the male for breeding (express estrus) at regular biologically defined intervals. The female is receptive to males only while experiencing estrus.
For breeding livestock, there are a number of advantages to be gained by finding methods to induce ovulation on a planned schedule, and thus synchronize the estrus cycle between many female animals. If animals can be bred on the same schedule, it increases convenience for the livestock owner, since the young animals will be at the same stage of development. Also, if artificial insemination (AI) is used for breeding, the AI technician's time can be used more efficiently, by breeding several females at the same time.  In order to induce estrus, a variety of techniques have been tried in recent years, involving both more natural, and more hormonal based methods. Different ways of injecting or feeding hormones to livestock are costly, and have variable success rates.
Average length (days) of estrus and estrous cycles:


Synapsida is a diverse group of tetrapod vertebrates that includes all mammals and their extinct relatives. It is one of the two major clades of the group Amniota, the other being the more diverse group Sauropsida (which includes all extant reptiles and birds). Synapsids have a single lower temporal fenestra, an opening low in the skull roof behind each eye socket. These openings create a bony arch that allows for the attachment of larger jaw muscles and a more efficient bite. While previously argued to be distinctive to synapsids, single temporal fenestrae are also found in many primitive sauropsids. It has recently been argued that the last common ancestor of synapsids and sauropsids shared a single lower temporal fenestra.
The basal amniotes (reptiliomorphs) from which synapsids evolved were historically simply called "reptiles". Therefore, non-mammalian synapsids were then described as mammal-like reptiles in classical systematics, and non-therapsid synapsids were also referred to as pelycosaurs or pelycosaur-grade synapsids. These paraphyletic terms have fallen out of favor and are only used informally (if at all) in modern literature, as it is now known that all extant reptiles are more closely related to each other and birds than to synapsids, so the word "reptile" has been re-defined to mean only members of Sauropsida or even just an under-clade thereof. In a cladistic sense, synapsids are in fact a monophyletic sister taxon of sauropsids, rather than a part of the sauropsid lineage. Modern alternatives sometimes used include stem mammals, proto-mammals, paramammals or pan-mammals. Most lineages of pelycosaur-grade synapsids were replaced by the more advanced therapsids, which evolved from sphenacodontian pelycosaurs, at the end of the Early Permian, a transition known as Olson's Gap/Extinction.
The earliest synapsids appeared towards the end of the Carboniferous, around 315 to 307 million years ago. Synapsids were the largest terrestrial vertebrates in the Permian period (299 to 251 mya), rivalled only by some large pareiasaurian parareptiles such as Scutosaurus. They were the dominant land predators of the late Paleozoic and early Mesozoic, with eupelycosaurs such as Dimetrodon, Titanophoneus and Inostrancevia being the apex predators during the Permian, and theriodonts such as Moschorhinus during the Early Triassic. Synapsid population and diversity were severely reduced by the Capitanian mass extinction event and the Permian–Triassic extinction event, and only two groups of therapsids, the dicynodonts and eutheriodonts (consisting of therocephalians and cynodonts) are known to have survived into the Triassic. These therapsids rebounded as disaster taxa during the early Mesozoic, with the dicynodont Lystrosaurus making up as much as 95% of all land species at one time, but declined again after the Smithian–Spathian boundary event with their dominant niches largely taken over by the rise of archosaurian sauropsids, first by the pseudosuchians and then by the pterosaurs and dinosaurs. The cynodont group Probainognathia, which includes the group Mammaliaformes, were the only synapsids to survive beyond the Triassic, During the Jurassic, cynodonts lived mostly nocturnally to avoid competition with dinosaurs. After the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event wiped out all non-avian dinosaurs and pterosaurs, synapsids (as mammals) rose to dominance once again during the Cenozoic, with roughly 6,800 species living currently.
Linnaean and cladistic classifications
At the turn of the 20th century, synapsids were thought to be one of the four main subclasses of reptiles. However, this notion was disproved upon closer inspection of skeletal remains, as synapsids are differentiated from reptiles by their distinctive temporal openings. These openings in the skull bones allowed the attachment of larger jaw muscles, hence a more efficient bite.
Synapsids were subsequently considered to be a later reptilian lineage that became mammals by gradually evolving increasingly mammalian features, hence the name "mammal-like reptiles" (also known as pelycosaurs). These became the traditional terms for all Paleozoic (early) synapsids. More recent studies have debunked this notion as well, and reptiles are now classified within Sauropsida (sauropsids), the sister group to synapsids, thus making synapsids their own taxonomic group.
As a result, the paraphyletic terms "mammal-like reptile" and "pelycosaur" are seen as outdated and disfavored in technical literature, and the term stem mammal (or sometimes protomammal or paramammal) is used instead. Phylogenetically, it is now understood that synapsids comprise an independent branch of the tree of life. The monophyly of Synapsida is not in doubt, and the expressions such as "Synapsida contains the mammals" and "synapsids gave rise to the mammals" both express the same phylogenetic hypothesis. This terminology reflects the modern cladistic approach to animal relationships, according to which the only valid groups are those that include all of the descendants of a common ancestor: these are known as monophyletic groups, or clades.
Additionally, Reptilia (reptiles) has been revised into a monophyletic group and is considered entirely distinct from Synapsida, falling within Sauropsida, the sister group of Synapsida within Amniota.
Primitive and advanced synapsids
The synapsids are traditionally divided for convenience, into therapsids, an advanced group of synapsids and the branch within which mammals evolved, and stem mammals, (previously known as pelycosaurs), comprising the other six more primitive families of synapsids. Stem mammals were all rather lizard-like, with sprawling gait and possibly horny scutes, while therapsids tended to have a more erect pose and possibly hair, at least in some forms. In traditional taxonomy, the Synapsida encompasses two distinct grades: the low-slung stem mammals have given rise to the more erect therapsids, who in their turn have given rise to the mammals. In traditional vertebrate classification, the stem mammals and therapsids were both considered orders of the subclass Synapsida.
Practical versus phylogenetic usage of "synapsid" and "therapsid"
In phylogenetic nomenclature, the terms are used somewhat differently, as the daughter clades are included. Most papers published during the 21st century have treated "Pelycosaur" as an informal grouping of primitive members. Therapsida has remained in use as a clade containing both the traditional therapsid families and mammals.
Although Synapsida and Therapsida include modern mammals, in practical usage, those two terms are used almost exclusively when referring to the more basal members that lie outside of Mammaliaformes.
CharacteristicsSkull openings
Synapsids evolved a temporal fenestra behind each eye orbit on the lateral surface of the skull. It may have provided new attachment sites for jaw muscles. Originally, the openings in the skull left the inner cranium covered only by the jaw muscles, but in higher therapsids and mammals, the sphenoid bone has expanded to close the opening. This has left the lower margin of the opening as an arch extending from the lower edges of the braincase.
While historically argued to be distinctive to synapsids, recent research has demonstrated that many primitive sauropsids also have a single lower temporal fenestra and it has also been suggested that many thought to be sauropsids with anapsid skulls completely lacking temporal fenestrae are not reptiles but stem-amniotes, implying that this trait was possibly present in the last common ancestor of synapsids and sauropsids, and not a distinctive trait of Synapsida.
Synapsids ancestrally had an opening on the skull roof (pineal foramen) for the parietal eye, a light sensitive organ still found in some amphibians and reptiles used for calibrating thermoregulation and the circadian rhythm among other functions. The functionality of the eye was lost and the pineal foramen closed over in the cynodont line ancestral to mammals (Probainognathia).
Teeth
Many synapsids including living mammals are characterised by heterodont teeth that vary in size and/or shape along the tooth row. This was relatively incipient in many early "pelycosaur" synapsids, but became pronounced in advanced sphenacodontian synapsids, particularly in therapsids, where the teeth became differentiated into incisor, canine and postcanine teeth. The dicynodonts are unique among synapsids for losing most (or all in the case of some dicynodonts) of their teeth in favour of a horny, keratinous turtle-like beak. Tooth cusps first emerged within the cynodont ancestors of mammals. Most non-mammalian synapsids are thought to have continuously replaced their teeth throughout life (polyphyodonty), with advanced cynodonts having evolved limited cycles of tooth replacement, culminating in the emergence of the two sets of teeth (diphyodonty) in Mammaliformes (or possibly the slightly broader grouping Mammaliamorpha).
Jaw and ears
Like their reptilian counterparts, the lower jaws of most non-mammalian synapsids were made up of several major bones including the dentary (the tooth-bearing bone), as well as the articular, angular, surangular and splenial. In cynodonts, these jaw bones other than the dentary became reduced in size and either lost or, in the case of the angular and articular, gradually moved into forming bones of the ear. While modern mammals possess the malleus, incus, tympanic, and stapes, basal synapsids (like all other tetrapods) possess only a stapes. The malleus is derived from the articular and the tympanic (also widely known as the ectotympanic) is derived from the angular bones, while the incus is derived from the quadrate (a cranial bone).
Mammalian jaw structures are also set apart by the dentary-squamosal jaw joint. In this form of jaw joint, the dentary forms a connection with a depression in the squamosal known as the glenoid fossa. In contrast, all other jawed vertebrates, including reptiles and non-cynodont synapsids, possess a jaw joint in which one of the smaller bones of the lower jaw, the articular, makes a connection with a bone of the cranium called the quadrate bone to form the articular-quadrate jaw joint. Non-mammalian cynodonts show articulations transitional between these two conditions.
Palate
Synapsids ancestrally possess palatal teeth present on the bones of the roof of the mouth. These were lost in the cynodont ancestors of mammals.
Over time, as synapsids became more mammalian and less 'reptilian', they began to develop a secondary palate, separating the mouth and nasal cavity. In early synapsids, a secondary palate began to form on the sides of the maxilla, still leaving the mouth and nostril connected.
Eventually, the two sides of the palate began to curve together, forming a U shape instead of a C shape. The palate also began to extend back toward the throat, securing the entire mouth and creating a full palatine bone. The maxilla is also closed completely. In fossils of one of the first eutheriodonts, the beginnings of a palate are clearly visible. The later Thrinaxodon has a full and completely closed palate, forming a clear progression.
Skin and fur
In addition to the glandular skin covered in fur found in most modern mammals, modern and extinct synapsids possess a variety of modified skin coverings, including osteoderms (bony armor embedded in the skin), scutes (protective structures of the dermis often with a horny covering), hair or fur, and scale-like structures (often formed from modified hair, as in pangolins and some rodents). While the skin of reptiles is rather thin, that of mammals has a thick dermal layer.
Although the nature of early synapsid skin was previously ambiguous, it has now been conclusively shown that early "pelycosaur" synapsids were covered in epidermal scales similar to those of reptiles (with the bodies of at least some sphenacodontids having rectangular scales on the underside of the body while their limbs were covered in hexagonal scales). It has been suggested that epidermal scales evolved in their common ancestor prior to the split between reptiles and synapsids.
It is currently unknown exactly when mammalian characteristics such as body hair and mammary glands first appeared, as the fossils only rarely provide direct evidence for soft tissues. The only unambiguous skin impressions known from non-cynodont therapsids are those of the dinocephalian Estemmenosuchus from the Middle Permian of Russia and the dicynodont Lystrosaurus from the Early Triassic of South Africa, which both exhibit "bulging ellipsoid tubercules with a tendency to partially protrude one another, producing an overall pustular surface texture". Hair-like structures in Late Permian coprolites from Russia and possibly South Africa may suggest that some therapsids had possibly acquired hair by this time, though the nature of these structures is ambiguous.
Whiskers are suggested to have first evolved in cynodonts belonging to the clade Prozostrodontia based on their skull anatomy. The oldest known fossil showing unambiguous imprints of hair is the Callovian (late middle Jurassic) Castorocauda and several contemporary haramiyidans, both non-mammalian mammaliaform (see below, however). More primitive members of the Cynodontia are also hypothesized to have had fur or a fur-like covering based on their inferred warm-blooded metabolism. While more direct evidence of fur in early cynodonts has been proposed in the form of small pits on the snout possibly associated with whiskers, such pits are also found in some reptiles that lack whiskers. There is evidence that some other non-mammalian cynodonts more basal than Castorocauda, such as Morganucodon, had Harderian glands, which are associated with the grooming and maintenance of fur. The apparent absence of these glands in non-mammaliaformes may suggest that fur did not originate until that point in synapsid evolution. It is possible that fur and associated features of true warm-bloodedness did not appear until some synapsids became extremely small and nocturnal, necessitating a higher metabolism. Mutation of the MSX2 gene in mice shows that when the gene is made non-functional, the mice fail to develop a hair coat, and the pineal foramen, which is ancestrally closed in mammals, becomes open. This may suggest that the two developments occurred around the same time in the cynodont ancestors of mammals.
Patagia
Aerial locomotion first began in non-mammalian haramiyidan cynodonts, with Arboroharamiya, Xianshou, Maiopatagium and Vilevolodon bearing exquisitely preserved, fur-covered wing membranes that stretch across the limbs and tail. Their fingers are elongated, similar to those of bats and colugos and likely sharing similar roles both as wing supports and to hang on tree branches.
Within true mammals, aerial locomotion first occurs in volaticotherian eutriconodonts. A fossil Volaticotherium has an exquisitely preserved furry patagium with delicate wrinkles and that is very extensive, "sandwiching" the poorly preserved hands and feet and extending to the base of the tail. Argentoconodon, a close relative, shares a similar femur adapted for flight stresses, indicating a similar lifestyle.
Therian mammals would only achieve powered flight and gliding long after these early aeronauts became extinct, with the earliest-known gliding metatherians and bats evolving in the Paleocene.
Orifices, reproduction and mammary glands
Like other tetrapods, synapsids ancestrally had a cloaca (a single opening for defecation, urination and reproduction) on the underside of the base of the tail, which in the case of synapsids faces directly downwards. A single cloacal opening is retained by monotremes, and most marsupials, but most placental mammals have the anus and reproductive organs separated by the perineum.
Most or all non-mammalian synapsids may have laid relatively soft leathery eggs similar to those of monotremes, which lack a relatively thick hard calcified shell like those found in many modern reptile and bird eggs. This may also explain why there is no fossil evidence for synapsid eggshells to date. Egg laying in non-mammalian synapsids has seemingly been confirmed by a tightly coiled embryo of the dicynodont therapsid Lystrosaurus found in the Early Triassic of South Africa which was likely laid in an (unpreserved) soft leathery egg. Because they were vulnerable to desiccation, secretions from apocrine-like glands may have helped keep the eggs moist.
According to Oftedal, early synapsids may have buried the eggs into moisture laden soil, hydrating them with contact with the moist skin, or may have carried them in a moist pouch, similar to that of monotremes (echidnas carry their eggs and offspring via a temporary pouch), though this would limit the mobility of the parent. The latter may have been the primitive form of egg care in synapsids rather than simply burying the eggs, and the constraint on the parent's mobility would have been solved by having the eggs "parked" in nests during foraging or other activities and periodically be hydrated, allowing higher clutch sizes than could fit inside a pouch (or pouches) at once, and large eggs, which would be cumbersome to carry in a pouch, would be easier to care for. The basis of Oftedal's speculation is the fact that many species of anurans can carry eggs or tadpoles attached to the skin, or embedded within cutaneous "pouches" and how most salamanders curl around their eggs to keep them moist, both groups also having glandular skin. The relatively large size of the eggs of Lystrosaurus suggests that dicynodonts and probably by extension other non cynodont synapsids had enough yolk in their eggs to develop sufficiently without the use of milk, suggesting that they lacked it.
The glands involved in this mechanism would later evolve into true mammary glands with multiple modes of secretion in association with hair follicles. Comparative analyses of the evolutionary origin of milk constituents support a scenario in which the secretions from these glands evolved into a complex, nutrient-rich milk long before true mammals arose (with some of the constituents possibly predating the split between the synapsid and sauropsid lines). Cynodonts were almost certainly able to produce this, which allowed a progressive decline of yolk mass and thus egg size, resulting in increasingly altricial hatchlings as milk became the primary source of nutrition, which is all evidenced by the small body size, the presence of epipubic bones, and limited tooth replacement in advanced cynodonts, as well as in mammaliaforms.
Metabolism and activity cycle
It has been disputed when endothermy arose in the synapsid lineage. Some propose that it arose in the common ancestor of synapsids, others that endothermy is only present in members of Therapsida (perhaps with separate origins in dicynodonts and cynodonts), and that synapsids are ancestrally ectothermic like reptiles.
Based on the size of the eye sockets and the scleral ring, some non-mammalian synapsids were likely diurnal (active during the day), while others are likely to have been nocturnal.
Evolutionary history
Over the course of synapsid evolution, progenitor taxa at the start of adaptive radiations have tended to be derived carnivores. Synapsid adaptive radiations have generally occurred after extinction events that depleted the biosphere and left vacant niches open to be filled by newly evolved taxa. In non-mammaliaform synapsids, those taxa that gave rise to rapidly diversifying lineages have been both small and large in body size, although after the Late Triassic, progenitors of new synapsid lineages have generally been small, unspecialised generalists.
The earliest unambiguous synapsids are known from the Moscovian stage of the Late Carboniferous, around 315-307 million years ago, known from both North America and Europe including Archaeothyris  and Echinerpeton (both ophiaconodontids), as well as Dendromaia (a varanopid), though ambiguous possible older Bashkirian (~315-320 million years ago) fossils are known from Joggins Formation of Canada.  The early "pelycosaurian" synapsids spread and diversified, becoming dominant land predators and the largest terrestrial animals in the latest Carboniferous and Early Permian periods, ranging up to 6 metres (20 ft) in length. They were sprawling, bulky, possibly cold-blooded, and had small brains. Some, such as Dimetrodon, had large sails that might have helped raise their body temperature. A few relict groups lasted into the later Permian but, by the middle of the Late Permian, all had either died off or evolved into their successors, the therapsids.

The therapsids, a more advanced group of synapsids, appeared during the Middle Permian and included the largest terrestrial animals in the Middle and Late Permian. They included herbivores and carnivores, ranging from small animals the size of a rat (e.g.: Robertia), to large, bulky herbivores a ton or more in weight (e.g.: Moschops). After flourishing for many millions of years, these successful animals were all but wiped out by the Permian–Triassic mass extinction about 250 mya, the largest known extinction in Earth's history, possibly related to the Siberian Traps volcanic event.
Only a few therapsids went on to be successful in the new early Triassic landscape; they include Lystrosaurus and Cynognathus, the latter of which appeared later in the Early Triassic. However, they were accompanied by the early archosaurs (soon to give rise to the dinosaurs), which took over the dominant niches after the Smithian-Spathian boundary event. Some of these archosaurs, such as Euparkeria, were small and lightly built, while others, such as Erythrosuchus, were as big as or bigger than the largest therapsids.

After the Permian extinction, the synapsids did not count more than three surviving clades. The first comprised the therocephalians, which only lasted the first 20 million years of the Triassic period. The second were specialised, beaked herbivores known as dicynodonts (such as the Kannemeyeriidae), which contained some members that reached large size (up to a tonne or more). And finally there were the increasingly mammal-like carnivorous, herbivorous, and insectivorous cynodonts, including the eucynodonts from the Olenekian age, an early representative of which was Cynognathus.

Unlike the dicynodonts, which were large, the cynodonts became progressively smaller and more mammal-like as the Triassic progressed, though some forms like Trucidocynodon remained large. The first mammaliaforms evolved from the cynodonts during the early Norian age of the Late Triassic, about 225 mya.
During the evolutionary succession from early therapsid to cynodont to eucynodont to mammal, the main lower jaw bone, the dentary, replaced the adjacent bones. Thus, the lower jaw gradually became just one large bone, with several of the smaller jaw bones migrating into the inner ear and allowing sophisticated hearing.
Triassic and Jurassic ancestors of living mammals, along with their close relatives, had high metabolic rates. This meant consuming food (generally thought to be insects) in much greater quantity. To facilitate rapid digestion, these synapsids evolved mastication (chewing) and specialized teeth that aided chewing. Limbs also evolved to move under the body instead of to the side, allowing them to breathe more efficiently during locomotion. This helped make it possible to support their higher metabolic demands.

Whether through climate change, vegetation change, ecological competition, or a combination of factors, most of the remaining large cynodonts (belonging to the Traversodontidae) and dicynodonts (of the family Kannemeyeriidae) had disappeared by the Rhaetian age, even before the Triassic–Jurassic extinction event that killed off most of the large non-dinosaurian archosaurs. The remaining Mesozoic synapsids were small, ranging from the size of a shrew to the badger-like mammal Repenomamus.

During the Jurassic and Cretaceous, the remaining non-mammalian cynodonts were small, such as Tritylodon. No cynodont grew larger than a cat. Most Jurassic and Cretaceous cynodonts were herbivorous, though some were carnivorous. The family Tritheledontidae, which first appeared near the end of the Triassic, was carnivorous and persisted well into the Middle Jurassic. The other, Tritylodontidae, first appeared at the same time as the tritheledonts, but was herbivorous. This group became extinct at the end of the Early Cretaceous epoch. Dicynodonts are generally thought to have become extinct near the end of the Triassic period, but there was evidence this group survived, in the form of six fragments of fossil bone that were found in Cretaceous rocks of Queensland, Australia. If true, it would mean there is a significant ghost lineage of Dicynodonts in Gondwana. However, these fossils were re-described in 2019 as being Pleistocene in age, and possibly belonging to a diprotodontid marsupial.
Today, the 5,500 species of living synapsids, known as the mammals, include both aquatic (cetaceans) and flying (bats) species, and the largest animal ever known to have existed (the blue whale). Humans are synapsids, as well. Most mammals are viviparous and give birth to live young rather than laying eggs with the exception being the monotremes.
Relationships
Below is a cladogram of the most commonly accepted phylogeny of synapsids, showing a long stem lineage including Mammalia and successively more basal clades such as Theriodontia, Therapsida and Sphenacodontia:

Most uncertainty in the phylogeny of synapsids lies among the earliest members of the group, including forms traditionally placed within Pelycosauria. As one of the earliest phylogenetic analyses, Brinkman & Eberth (1983) placed the family Varanopidae with Caseasauria as the most basal offshoot of the synapsid lineage. Reisz (1986) removed Varanopidae from Caseasauria, placing it in a more derived position on the stem. While most analyses find Caseasauria to be the most basal synapsid clade, Benson's analysis (2012) placed a clade containing Ophiacodontidae and Varanopidae as the most basal synapsids, with Caseasauria occupying a more derived position. Benson attributed this revised phylogeny to the inclusion of postcranial characteristics, or features of the skeleton other than the skull, in his analysis. When only cranial or skull features were included, Caseasauria remained the most basal synapsid clade. Below is a cladogram modified from Benson's analysis (2012):

However, more recent examination of the phylogeny of basal synapsids, incorporating newly described basal caseids and eothyridids, returned Caseasauria to its position as the sister to all other synapsids. Brocklehurst et al. (2016) demonstrated that many of the postcranial characters used by Benson (2012) to unite Caseasauria with Sphenacodontidae and Edaphosauridae were absent in the newly discovered postcranial material of eothyridids, and were therefore acquired convergently.


Placentalia () is one of the three extant subdivisions of the class Mammalia, the other two being Monotremata and Marsupialia. Placentalia contains the vast majority of extant mammals, which are partly distinguished from monotremes and marsupials in that the fetus is carried in the uterus of its mother to a relatively late stage of development. The name is something of a misnomer, considering that marsupials also nourish their fetuses via a placenta, though for a relatively briefer period, giving birth to less-developed young, which are then nurtured for a period inside the mother's pouch. Placentalia represents the only living group within Eutheria, which contains all mammals that are more closely related to placentals than they are to marsupials.
Anatomical features
Placental mammals are anatomically distinguished from other mammals by:

a sufficiently wide opening at the bottom of the pelvis to allow the birth of a large baby relative to the size of the mother.
the absence of epipubic bones extending forward from the pelvis, which are found in all other mammals. (Their function in non-placental mammals is to stiffen the body during locomotion, but in placentals they would inhibit the expansion of the abdomen during pregnancy.)
the rearmost bones of the foot fit into a socket formed by the ends of the tibia and fibula, forming a complete mortise and tenon upper ankle joint.
the presence of a malleolus at the bottom of the fibula.
instead of a cloaca like monotremes, marsupials and most other vertebrates, the urogenital ducts exit through the vulva or penis and the rectum opens as the anus.
the presence of a corpus callosum in between the cerebral hemispheres.
Subdivisions
Analysis of molecular data led to rapid changes in assessments of the phylogeny of placental orders at the close of the 20th century. A novel phylogeny and classification of placental orders appeared with Waddell, Hasegawa and Okada in 1999. "Jumping genes"-type retroposon presence/absence patterns have provided corroboration of phylogenetic relationships inferred from molecular sequences. It is now widely accepted that there are three major subdivisions or lineages of placental mammals: Boreoeutheria, Xenarthra, and Afrotheria. All of these diverged from common ancestors.
2022 studies of Bertrand, O. C. and Sarah L. Shelley have identified leptictids, palaeoryctids and taeniodonts as basal placental mammal clades. Leptictids were also proposed to be close relatives of Boreoeutheria.
The 19 living orders of Placentalia in the three groups are:

Magnorder Atlantogenata
Superorder Xenarthra
Order Cingulata (armadillos)
Order Pilosa (sloths and anteaters)
Superorder Afrotheria
Grandorder Afroinsectiphilia
Order Tubulidentata (aardvarks)
Mirorder Afroinsectivora
Order Afrosoricida (tenrecs, otter shrews, and golden moles)
Order Macroscelidea (elephant shrews)
Grandorder Paenungulata
Order Hyracoidea (hyraxes)
Mirorder Tethytheria
Order Proboscidea (elephants)
Order Sirenia (dugongs and manatees)
Magnorder Boreoeutheria
Superorder Euarchontoglires
Grandorder Gliriformes
Mirorder Glires
Order Lagomorpha (rabbits, hares, and pikas)
Order Rodentia (rodents: mice, rats, hamsters, guinea pigs, chinchillas, capybaras, porcupines, voles, squirrels, beavers, etc.)
Grandorder Euarchonta
Order Scandentia (treeshrews)
Mirorder Primatomorpha
Order Dermoptera (colugos)
Order Primates (primates: monkeys, apes (including humans), lemurs, lorisids, galagos, and tarsiers)
Superorder Laurasiatheria
Order Eulipotyphla (hedgehogs, gymnures, shrews, moles, and solenodons)
Order Chiroptera (bats)
Grandorder Ferungulata
Mirorder Euungulata
Order Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates: cattle, antelopes, sheep, deer, camelids, pigs, giraffes, cetaceans, hippopotamuses, goats, buffalo, etc.)
Order Perissodactyla (odd-toed ungulates: horses, asses, zebras, rhinoceroses, and tapirs)
Mirorder Ferae
Order Pholidota (pangolins)
Order Carnivora (carnivorans: dogs, cats, bears, pinnipeds, mongooses, raccoons, skunks, hyenas, weasels, etc.)
The exact relationships among these three lineages is currently a subject of debate, and four different hypotheses have been proposed with respect to which group is basal or diverged first from other placentals. These hypotheses are Atlantogenata (basal Boreoeutheria), Epitheria (basal Xenarthra), Exafroplacentalia (basal Afrotheria) and a hypothesis supporting a near simultaneous divergence. Estimates for the divergence times among these three placental groups mostly range from 105 to 120 million years ago (MYA), depending on the type of DNA, whether it is translated, and the phylogenetic method (e.g. nuclear or mitochondrial), and varying interpretations of paleogeographic data. In addition, a strict molecular clock does not hold, so it is necessary to assume models of how evolutionary rates change along lineages. These assumptions alone can make substantial differences to the relative ages of different mammal groups estimated with genomic data.

Cladogram and classification based on Amrine-Madsen, H. et al.. (2003) and Asher, R. J. et al.. (2009) Compare with Waddell, Hasegawa and Okada (1999) and Waddell et al. (2001).
Genomics
As of 2020, the genome has been sequenced for at least one species in each extant placental order and in 83% of families (105 of 127 extant placental families).
See list of sequenced animal genomes.
Evolutionary history
True placental mammals (the crown group including all modern placentals) arose from stem-group members of the clade Eutheria, which had existed since at least the Middle Jurassic epoch, about 170 mya. These early eutherians were small, nocturnal insect eaters, with adaptations for life in trees.
True placentals may have originated in the Late Cretaceous around 90 mya, but the earliest undisputed fossils are dated to the Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary (K-Pg boundary). The genus Protungulatum is sometimes placed as a stem-ungulate, with probably the earliest known species P. coombsi from the strata within the Hell Creek Formation specifically dated to at least 300,000 years before the K-Pg boundary. The genus Purgatorius, sometimes considered a stem-primate, appears no more than 300,000 years after the K-Pg boundary. One study has recovered both genera to be closely related and as stem-eutherians outside modern placental mammals, but others have recovered Protungulatum as a pan-euungulate based on phylogenetic analysis and inner ear anatomy different from non-placentals. The rapid appearance of placentals after the mass extinction at the end of the Cretaceous suggests that the group had already originated and undergone an initial diversification in the Late Cretaceous, as suggested by molecular clocks. The lineages leading to Xenarthra and Afrotheria probably originated around 90 mya, and Boreoeutheria underwent an initial diversification around 70-80 mya, producing the lineages that eventually would lead to modern primates, rodents, insectivores, artiodactyls, and carnivorans.
However, modern members of the placental orders originated in the Paleogene around 66 to 23 mya, following the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event. The evolution of crown orders such modern primates, rodents, and carnivores appears to be part of an adaptive radiation that took place as mammals quickly evolved to take advantage of ecological niches that were left open when most dinosaurs and other animals disappeared following the Chicxulub asteroid impact. As they occupied new niches, mammals rapidly increased in body size, and began to take over the large herbivore and large carnivore niches that had been left open by the decimation of the dinosaurs (and perhaps more relevantly competing synapsids). Mammals also exploited niches that the non-avian dinosaurs had never touched: for example, bats evolved flight and echolocation, allowing them to be highly effective nocturnal, aerial insectivores; and whales first occupied freshwater lakes and rivers and then moved into the oceans. Primates, meanwhile, acquired specialized grasping hands and feet which allowed them to grasp branches, and large eyes with keener vision which allowed them to forage in the dark.
The evolution of land placentals followed different pathways on different continents since they cannot easily cross large bodies of water. An exception is smaller placentals such as rodents and primates, who left Laurasia and colonized Africa and then South America via rafting.
In Africa, the Afrotheria underwent a major adaptive radiation, which led to elephants, elephant shrews, tenrecs, golden moles, aardvarks, and manatees. In South America a similar event occurred, with radiation of the Xenarthra, which led to modern sloths, anteaters, and armadillos, as well as the extinct ground sloths and glyptodonts. Expansion in Laurasia was dominated by Boreoeutheria, which includes primates and rodents, insectivores, carnivores, perissodactyls and artiodactyls. These groups expanded beyond a single continent when land bridges formed linking Africa to Eurasia and South America to North America.
A study on eutherian diversity suggests that placental diversity was constrained during the Paleocene, while multituberculate mammals diversified; afterwards, multituberculates decline and placentals explode in diversity.


Theria ( or ; from Ancient Greek  θηρίον, thēríon 'wild beast') is a subclass of mammals amongst the Theriiformes. Theria contains the eutherians (which includes placental mammals) and the metatherians (which includes marsupials) but excludes the egg-laying monotremes and various extinct mammals evolving prior to the common ancestor of placentals and marsupials.
Characteristics
Therians give birth (see Viviparity) to live young without a shelled egg. This is possible thanks to key proteins called syncytins which allow exchanges between the mother and its offspring through a placenta, even rudimental ones such as in marsupials. Genetic studies have suggested a viral origin of syncytins through the retroviral endogenization process, where the genome of a virus was incorporated into the host's DNA.
The marsupials and the placentals evolved from a common therian ancestor that gave live birth by suppressing the mother's immune system. While the marsupials continued to give birth to an underdeveloped fetus after a short pregnancy, the ancestors of placentals gradually evolved a prolonged pregnancy.
The exit openings of the urogenital system and the rectal opening (anus) are separated. The mammary glands lead to the teats. Unlike monotremes, these animals have no coracoid bone.
Pinnae (external ears) are also a distinctive trait that is a therian exclusivity, though some therians, such as the earless seals, have lost them secondarily. The flexible and protruding nose in therians is not found in any other vertebrates, and is the product of modified cells involved in the development of the upper jaw in other tetrapods. Almost all therians have whiskers.
The SRY gene is a protein in therians that helps initiate male sex determination.
Evolution
The earliest known therian mammal fossil is Juramaia, from China's Late Jurassic (Oxfordian stage).  However, the age estimates of the site are disputed based on the geological complexity and the geographically widespread nature of the Tiaojishan Formations. Further, King and Beck in 2020 argue for an Early Cretaceous age for Juramaia sinensis, in line with similar early mammaliaformes.
A 2022 review of the Southern Hemisphere Mesozoic mammal fossil record has argued that tribosphenic mammals arose in the Southern Hemisphere during the Early Jurassic, around 50 million years prior to the clade's earliest undisputed appearance in the Northern Hemisphere.
Molecular data suggests that therians may have originated even earlier, during the Early Jurassic. Therian mammals began to diversify 10–20 million years before the dinosaur extinction.
Taxonomy
The rank of "Theria" may vary depending on the classification system used.  The textbook classification system by Vaughan et al. (2000) gives the following:

In the above system, Theria is a subclass.  Alternatively, in the system proposed by
McKenna and Bell (1997) it is ranked as a supercohort under the subclass Theriiformes:

Another classification proposed by Luo et al. (2002) does not assign any rank to the taxonomic levels, but uses a purely cladistic system instead.


Mammalia is a class of animal within the phylum Chordata. Mammal classification has been through several iterations since Carl Linnaeus initially defined the class.
Many earlier, pre-Linnaean ideas have been completely abandoned by modern taxonomists, among these are the idea that bats are related to birds or that humans represent a group outside of other living things.
George Gaylord Simpson's classic "Principles of Classification and a Classification of Mammals" (1945) taxonomy text laid out a systematics of mammal origins and relationships that was universally taught until the end of the 20th century.
Since Simpson's 1945 classification, the paleontological record has been recalibrated, and the intervening years have seen much debate and progress concerning the theoretical underpinnings of systematization itself, partly through the new concept of cladistics. Though field work gradually made Simpson's classification outdated, it remained the closest thing to an official classification of mammals until revision from the end of the twentieth century into the twenty-first century.
No classification system is universally accepted; McKenna et al. and Wilson & Reader provide useful recent compendiums.  Competing ideas about the relationships of mammal orders do persist and are currently in development. Most significantly in recent years, cladistic thinking has led to an effort to ensure that all taxonomic designations represent monophyletic groups. The field has also seen a recent surge in interest and modification due to the results of molecular phylogenetics.
See List of placental mammals and List of monotremes and marsupials for more detailed information on mammal genera and species.
Molecular classification of placentals
Molecular studies by molecular systematists, based on DNA analysis, in the early 21st century have revealed new relationships among mammal families. Classification systems based on molecular studies reveal three major groups or lineages of placental mammals, Afrotheria, Xenarthra, and Boreoeutheria, which diverged from early common ancestors in the Cretaceous.
The relationships between these three lineages are contentious, and all three have been proposed as basal in different hypotheses.
The following taxonomy only includes living placentals (infraclass Eutheria):
AtlantogenataAfrotheria
Clade Afroinsectiphilia
Order Macroscelidea
Family Macroscelididae: (20 species), sengis or elephant shrews (Africa)
Order Afrosoricida
Family Tenrecidae: (31 species), tenrecs (Madagascar)
Family Potamogalidae: (3 species), otter-shrews (West and Central Africa)
Family Chrysochloridae: (21 species), golden moles (Africa south of the Sahara)
Order Tubulidentata
Family Orycteropodidae: (1 species), aardvark (Africa south of the Sahara)
Clade Paenungulata
Order Proboscidea
Family Elephantidae: (3 species), elephants (Africa, Southeast Asia)
Order Hyracoidea
Family Procaviidae: (4 species), hyraxes, dassies (Africa, Arabia)
Order Sirenia
Family Dugongidae: (1 species), dugong (East Africa, Red Sea, North Australia)
Family Trichechidae: (3 species), manatees (tropical Atlantic coasts and adjacent rivers)
Xenarthra
Order Cingulata
Family Chlamyphoridae: (14 species), armadillos (Neotropical)
Family Dasypodidae: (7 species), long-nosed armadillos (Neotropical and Nearctic)
Order Pilosa (=Dasypoda)
Suborder Vermilingua (anteaters)
Family Cyclopedidae: (1 species), silky anteater (Neotropical)
Family Myrmecophagidae: (3 species), anteaters (Neotropical)
Suborder Folivora (sloths)
Family Choloepodidae: (2 species), two-toed sloths (Neotropical)
Family Bradypodidae: (4 species), three-toed sloths (Neotropical)
BoreoeutheriaEuarchontoglires
Superorder Euarchonta
Order Scandentia
Family Ptilocercidae (1 species), pen-tailed treeshrews (Southeast Asia)
Family Tupaiidae: (19 species), treeshrews (Southeast Asia)
Mirorder Primatomorpha
Order Dermoptera
Family Cynocephalidae: (2 species), flying lemurs or colugos (Southeast Asia)
Order Primates: lemurs, bushbabies, monkeys, apes (cosmopolitan)
Family Cheirogaleidae: (32 species), dwarf lemurs (Madagascar)
Family Lemuridae: (22 species), lemurs (Madagascar)
Family Lepilemuridae: (26 species), sportive lemurs (Madagascar)
Family Indriidae: (19 species), indri and sifakas (Madagascar)
Family Daubentoniidae: (1 species), aye-aye (Madagascar area)
Family Lorisidae: (9 species), lorises and potto (Africa and Southeast Asia)
Family Galagidae: (19 species), galagos (Africa)
Family Tarsiidae: (9 species), tarsiers (Southeast Asia)
Family Callitrichidae: (41 species), marmosets and tamarins (South America)
Family Cebidae: (14 species), New World monkeys (South America)
Family Cercopithecidae: (137 species), Old World monkeys (Africa and Eurasia)
Family Hylobatidae: (14 species), gibbons (Southeast Asia)
Family Hominidae: (8 species), great apes (worldwide)
Superorder Glires
Order Lagomorpha: pikas, rabbits, hares (Eurasia, Africa, Americas)
Family Leporidae: (60 species), rabbits and hares (Eurasia, Africa, Americas)
Family Ochotonidae: (30 species), pikas (Holarctic)
Order Rodentia: rodents (cosmopolitan)
Suborder Castorimorpha
Family Castoridae: (2 species) beavers (Holarctic)
Family Geomyidae: (about 35 species) pocket gophers (North America)
Family Heteromyidae: (about 59 species) kangaroo rats and kangaroo mice (North America)
Suborder Myomorpha
Family Dipodidae: (33 species) jerboas (Africa, Eurasia, North America)
Family Zapodidae: (11 species) jumping mice (North America, Asia)
Family Sicistidae: (19 species) birch mice (Eurasia)
Family Platacanthomyidae: (3 species) spiny dormouse (Southeast Asia)
Family Spalacidae: (37 species) zokors, root rats, blind mole rats (Africa, Eurasia)
Family Calomyscidae: (8 species) mouse-like hamsters (Asia)
Family Nesomyidae: (68 species) old endemic African muroids (Africa, Madagascar)
Family Cricetidae: (about 580 species) hamsters, voles, and New World rats and mice (Holarctic, South America)
Family Muridae: (about 1,383 species) Old World rats and mice and gerbils (Africa, Eurasia, Australia)
Suborder Anomaluromorpha
Family Anomaluridae: (6 species) scaly-tailed flying squirrels (Africa)
Family Pedetidae: (2 species) springhares or springhaas (Africa)
Suborder Hystricomorpha
Family Ctenodactylidae: (5 species) gundis (Africa, Asia)
Family Diatomyidae: (1 species) Laotian rock rat (Southeast Asia)
Family Hystricidae: (11 Species) Old World porcupines (Africa, Asia)
Family Bathyergidae: (about 21 species) African mole-rats (Africa)
Family Petromuridae: (1 species) rock dassies (Africa)
Family Thryonomyidae: (2 species) cane rats (Africa)
Family Erethizontidae: (19 species) New World porcupines (New World)
Family Chinchillidae: (3 species) chinchillas and viscachas (South America)
Family Dinomyidae: (1 species) pacarana (South America)
Family Caviidae: (18 species) cavies and capybara (South America)
Family Dasyproctidae: (13 species) agoutis and acouchis (South America)
Family Cuniculidae: (about 3 species) paca (South America)
Family Ctenomyidae: (about 60 species) tuco-tucos (South America)
Family Octodontidae: (14 species) degus (South America)
Family Abrocomidae: (9 species) chinchilla-rats (South America)
Family Echimyidae: spiny rats (South America)
Family Capromyidae: (10 species) hutias (South America)
Family Heptaxodontidae: giant hutias (recently extinct)
Family Myocastoridae: (57 species) nutrias (South America)
Suborder Sciuromorpha
Family Aplodontiidae: (1 species) mountain beaver (western North America)
Family Sciuridae: (about 285 species) squirrels, chipmunks, and marmots (cosmopolitan except Australia)
Family Gliridae: (29 species) dormice (Africa, Eurasia)
Laurasiatheria
Order Eulipotyphla
Family Solenodontidae: (2 species) solenodons (Cuba, Hispaniola)
Family Nesophontidae: nesophontes (West Indies shrews) (recently extinct)
Family Soricidae: (385 species) shrews (Eurasia, Africa, North America to northern South America)
Family Talpidae: (59 species) moles, shrew-moles, desmans (Eurasia, North America)
Family Erinaceidae: (26 species) hedgehogs, gymnures (Eurasia, Africa)
Family Galericidae: (8 species) moonrats (southeast Asia)
Grandorder Chiroptera
Order Chiroptera: bats
Suborder Yinpterochiroptera
Family Pteropodidae: (about 197 species) flying foxes (Africa, Eurasia, Australia)
Family Hipposideridae: (84 species) trident bats, leaf-nosed bats
Family Rhinolophidae: (106 species) horseshoe bats (Old World)
Family Rhinopomatidae: (6 species) mouse-tailed bats (Africa, Southeast Asia)
Family Craseonycteridae: (1 species) Kitti's hog-nosed bat (Thailand)
Family Megadermatidae: (6 species) false vampire bats (Africa, Southeast Asia, Australia)
Suborder Yangochiroptera
Family Emballonuridae: (54 species) sac-winged bats (southern continents)
Family Nycteridae: (about 15 species) slit-faced bats (Africa, Southeast Asia)
Family Mystacinidae: (about 2 species) short-tailed bats (New Zealand)
Family Thyropteridae: (5 species) disk-winged bats (South America)
Family Furipteridae: (2 species) smoky bats (South America)
Family Noctilionidae: (2 species) fishing bats (South America)
Family Mormoopidae: (about 11 species) leaf-chinned bats (South America)
Family Phyllostomidae: (192 species) leaf-nosed bats (South America)
Family Myzopodidae: (2 species) sucker-footed bats (Madagascar)
Family Natalidae: (10 species) funnel-eared bats (South America)
Family Molossidae: (about 110 species) free-tailed bats (cosmopolitan)
Family Miniopteridae: (about 40 species) long-fingered bats (Africa, Eurasia, Australia)
Family Cistugidae: (2 species) wing-gland bats (Southern Africa)
Family Vespertilionidae: (over 300 species) vesper bats (cosmopolitan)
Grandorder Ferae
Order Pholidota
Family Manidae: (about 8 species) pangolins, scaly anteaters (Africa, South Asia)
Order Carnivora: carnivorans (cosmopolitan)
Suborder Feliformia
Family Nandiniidae: (4 species) African palm civet (Central Africa)
Family Prionodontidae: (2 species) Asiatic linsangs (Southeast Asia)
Family Felidae: (41 species) cats (cosmopolitan except Australia)
Family Viverridae: (33 species) civets, Asiatic palm civets (Africa, Southern Europe, Southeast Asia)
Family Herpestidae: (34 species) mongooses (Africa, Asia, Southern Europe)
Family Eupleridae: (10 species) Malagasy carnivorans (Madagascar)
Family Hyaenidae: (4 species) hyaenas, aardwolf (Africa, Asia)
Suborder Caniformia
Family Canidae: (38 species) dogs (cosmopolitan)
Family Ursidae: (8 species) bears (Europe, Asia, New World)
Family Otariidae: (15 species) eared seals (cosmopolitan except North Atlantic)
Family Odobenidae: (1 species) walrus (Northern North American, Northern Europe, Northern Asia)
Family Phocidae: (18 species) true seals (cosmopolitan)
Family Ailuridae: (1 species) red panda (South-Central Asia)
Family Mephitidae: (12 species) skunks (Southeast Asia, New World)
Family Mustelidae: (about 69 species) weasels and relatives (cosmopolitan except Australia)
Family Procyonidae: (14 species) ringtails, olingos, kinkajou, raccoons, coatis (New World)
Grandorder Euungulata
Order Perissodactyla: odd-toed ungulates
Family Equidae: (13 species) horses, zebras, donkeys (Africa, West and Central Asia)
Family Tapiridae: (3 species) tapirs (Central and South America, Southeast Asia)
Family Rhinocerotidae: (5 species) rhinoceroses (Africa, Southeast Asia)
Order Artiodactyla: even-toed ungulates (now includes cetaceans)
Suborder Suiformes
Family Suidae: (18 species) pigs (Africa, Eurasia)
Family Tayassuidae: (about 3 species) peccaries (New World)
Suborder Tylopoda
Family Camelidae: (7 species) camels (South America, Asia)
Suborder Ruminantia
Family Tragulidae: (10 species) mouse-deer (Africa, Asia)
Family Antilocapridae: (1 species) pronghorn (North America)
Family Giraffidae: (2-9 species) giraffe and okapi (Africa)
Family Cervidae: (26 species) deer (Holarctic, South America)
Family Moschidae: (7 species) musk deer (Asia)
Family Bovidae: (143 species) cattle, antelope, sheep, etc. (Africa, Holarctic)
Suborder Whippomorpha
Family Hippopotamidae: (2 species) hippos (Africa)
Infraorder Cetacea
Parvorder Mysticeti
Family Balaenopteridae: (10 species) rorquals and grey whales (cosmopolitan)
Family Balaenidae: (4 species) right and bowhead whales (polar and temperate waters)
Family Eschrichtiidae: (1 species) gray whale (North Pacific and North Atlantic)
Family Neobalaenidae: (1 species) pygmy right whales (southern hemisphere)
Parvorder Odontoceti
Family Delphinidae: (about 37 species) dolphins (cosmopolitan)
Family Monodontidae: (2 species) beluga and narwhal (Arctic, Atlantic, and Pacific)
Family Phocoenidae: (8 species) porpoises (cosmopolitan)
Family Physeteridae: (3 species) sperm whales (cosmopolitan)
Family Kogiidae: (2 species) dwarf sperm whales (cosmopolitan)
Family Platanistidae: (2 species) South Asian river dolphin (Southern Asia)
Family Iniidae: (1-4 species) Amazon River dolphin (South America)
Family Pontoporiidae: (1 species) La Plata River dolphin (South America)
Family Lipotidae: baiji
Family Ziphiidae: (24 species) beaked whales (cosmopolitan)
Standardized textbook classification
A somewhat standardized classification system has been adopted by most current mammalogy classroom textbooks. The following taxonomy of extant and recently extinct mammals is taken from the 6th edition of Vaughan's Mammalogy. This approach emphasizes an initial split between egg-laying prototherians and live-bearing therians. The therians are further divided into the marsupial Metatheria and the "placental" Eutheria. No attempt is made in this classification to further distinguish among the orders within these subclasses and infraclasses. This system also makes no note of the position of entirely fossil groups.
In this and later taxonomies, families are merely listed under the order to which they belong. More detailed relationships among families is presented in the article of each order.
Subclass Prototheria/Yinotheria
Order Monotremata
Family Tachyglossidae (echidnas)
Family Ornithorhynchidae (platypuses)
Subclass Theria
Infraclass Metatheria (marsupials and their nearest ancestors)
Order Didelphimorphia
Family Didelphidae (opossums, etc.)
Order Paucituberculata
Family Caenolestidae (shrew opossums)
Order Microbiotheria
Family Microbiotheriidae (monitos del monte)
Order Dasyuromorphia (most carnivorous marsupials)
Family Thylacinidae (Tasmanian tigers)
Family Myrmecobiidae (numbats)
Family Dasyuridae (Tasmanian devils, quolls, dunnarts, planigale, etc.)
Order Peramelemorphia (bandicoots, bilbies, etc.)
Family Peramelidae (bandicoots, echymiperas)
Family †Chaeropodidae (pig-footed bandicoot)
Order Notoryctemorphia (marsupial moles)
Family Notoryctidae
Order Diprotodontia
Family Phascolarctidae (koalas)
Family Vombatidae (wombats)
Family Phalangeridae (brushtail possums and cuscuses)
Family Potoroidae (bettongs, potoroos and rat kangaroos)
Family Macropodidae (kangaroos, wallabies, etc.)
Family Burramyidae (pygmy possums)
Family Pseudocheiridae (ringtailed possums, etc.)
Family Petauridae (striped possum, Leadbeater's possum, yellow-bellied glider, sugar glider, mahogany glider and squirrel glider)
Family Tarsipedidae (honey possum)
Family Acrobatidae (feathertail glider and feather-tailed possum)
Family Hypsiprymnodontidae (musky rat kangaroo)
Infraclass Eutheria
Order Afrosoricida
Family Tenrecidae (tenrecs)
Family Chrysochloridae (golden moles)
Order Macroscelidea
Family Macroscelididae (elephant-shrews)
Order Tubulidentata
Family Orycteropodidae (aardvark)
Order Proboscidea
Family Elephantidae (elephants)
Order Sirenia
Family Dugongidae (dugongs, sea cows)
Family Trichechidae (manatees)
Order Hyracoidea
Family Procaviidae (hyraxes)
Order Pilosa
Family Bradypodidae (three-toed tree sloths)
Family Megalonychidae (two-toed tree sloths)
Family Myrmecophagidae (tamanduas and giant anteater)
Family Cyclopedidae (silky anteater)
Order Cingulata
Family Dasypodidae (armadillos)
Order Dermoptera
Family Cynocephalidae (colugos)
Order Scandentia
Family Tupaiidae (tree shrews)
Family Ptilocercidae (pen-tailed treeshrew)
Order Primates
Family Cheirogaleidae (dwarf lemurs, mouse lemurs)
Family Lemuridae (lemurs)
Family Lepilemuridae (sportive lemurs)
Family Indriidae (wooly lemurs, sifakas)
Family Daubentoniidae (aye-aye)
Family Lorisidae (lorises)
Family Galagidae (bushbabies, galagos)
Family Tarsiidae (tarsiers)
Family Cebidae (marmosets, tamarins, capuchins, squirrel monkeys)
Family Aotidae (night monkeys)
Family Pitheciidae (titis, uacaris, sakis)
Family Atelidae (howlers, spider monkeys, wooly monkeys)
Family Cercopithecidae (Old World monkeys)
Family Hylobatidae (gibbons)
Family Hominidae (apes, human)
Order Rodentia
Family Aplodontiidae (sewellel or mountain beaver)
Family Sciuridae (squirrels)
Family Gliridae (dormice)
Family Castoridae (beavers)
Family Heteromyidae (kangaroo rats, pocket mice)
Family Geomyidae (pocket gophers)
Family Dipodidae (jerboas, birch mice, jumping mice)
Family Platacanthomyidae (tree mice)
Family Spalacidae (zokors, bamboo rats, mole rats)
Family Calomyscidae (calomyscuses)
Family Nesomyidae (pouched rats and mice, climbing and fat mice, etc.)
Family Cricetidae (voles, hamsters, New World rats and mice
Family Muridae (rats, mice)
Family Anomaluridae (scaily-tailed flying squirrels)
Family Pedetidae (springhaas, springhares)
Family Ctenodactylidae (gundis)
Family Diatomyidae (kha-nyous or Laotian rock rat)
Family Bathyergidae (mole-rats)
Family Hystricidae (African and Asian porcupines)
Family Petromuridae (dassie rat)
Family Thryonomyidae (can rats)
Family Erethizontidae (bristle-spined rat and New World porcupines)
Family Chinchillidae (chinchillas, vizcachas)
Family Dinomyidae (pacarana)
Family Caviidae (cuis, guinea-pigs, cavies, maras, capybaras)
Family Dasyproctidae (agoutis, acouchis)
Family Cuniculidae (pacas)
Family Ctenomyidae (tuco-tucos)
Family Octodontidae (degus, rock rats, vizcacha-rats)
Family Abrocomidae (chinchilla rats)
Family Echimyidae (spiny rats, tree rats, hutias, & coypu)
Family †Heptaxodontidae (giant hutias and key mice)
Order Lagomorpha
Family Ochotonidae (pikas)
Family †Prolagidae (Sardinian pika)
Family Leporidae (rabbits)
Order Eulipotyphla
Family Erinaceidae (hedgehogs, gymnures)
Family †Nesophontidae (nesophontes)
Family Solenodontidae (solenodons, alamiquis)
Family Soricidae (shrews)
Family Talpidae (moles, desmans)
Order Chiroptera
Family Pteropodidae (Old World fruit bats, flying foxes)
Family Rhinopomatidae (mouse-tailed bats)
Family Craseonycteridae (hog-nosed or bumblebee bat)
Family Megadermatidae (false vampire bats)
Family Rhinolophidae (horseshoe bats)
Family Emballonuridae (sac-winged bats)
Family Nycteridae (slit-faced bats)
Family Myzopodidae (sucker-footed bats)
Family Mystacinidae (New Zealand short-tailed bats)
Family Thyropteridae (disk-winged bats)
Family Furipteridae (smokey bat and thumbless bat)
Family Noctilionidae (bulldog bats)
Family Mormoopidae (mustached and ghost-faced bats)
Family Phyllostomidae (New World leaf-nosed bats)
Family Natalidae (funnel-eared bats)
Family Molossidae (free-tailed bats)
Family Vespertilionidae (evening bats, common bats)
Family Miniopteridae (bent-winged or long-fingered bats)
Order Pholidota
Family Manidae (pangolins)
Order Carnivora
Family Felidae (cats)
Family Viverridae (civets, genets)
Family Eupleridae (falanouc, fossa, Madagascaran mongooses)
Family Nandiniidae (African palm civet)
Family Herpestidae (mongooses)
Family Hyaenidae (hyaenas, aardwolf)
Family Canidae (wolves, foxes, jackals)
Family Ursidae (bears, giant panda)
Family Odobenidae (walrus)
Family Otariidae (eared seals, fur seals, sea lions)
Family Phocidae (earless seals)
Family Mustelidae (weasels, badgers, otters)
Family Procyonidae (raccoons, ringtails, coatis)
Family Ailuridae (red panda)
Order Perissodactyla
Family Equidae (horses, asses, zebras)
Family Tapiridae (tapirs)
Family Rhinocerotidae (rhinoceroses)
Order Artiodactyla
Family Suidae (hogs, pigs)
Family Tayassuidae (peccaries)
Family Hippopotamidae (hippopotamuses)
Family Camelidae (camels, vicunas, guanacos, llamas)
Family Tragulidae (chevrotains and mouse deer)
Family Moschidae (musk deer)
Family Cervidae (deer)
Family Antilocapridae (pronghorn)
Family Giraffidae (giraffe and okapi)
Family Bovidae (antelope, bison, cattle, duikers, goats, sheep, etc.)
Order Cetacea
Family Balaenidae (right whales)
Family Balaenopteridae (rorquals)
Family Eschrichtiidae (gray whales)
Family Cetotheriidae (pygmy right whale)
Family Delphinidae (ocean dolphins)
Family Monodontidae (narwhal and beluga)
Family Phocoenidae (porpoises)
Family Physeteridae (sperm whales)
Family Platanistidae (Ganges and Indus river dolphins)
Family Iniidae (baiji, franciscana, and Amazon river dolphins)
Family Ziphiidae (beaked whales)
McKenna/Bell classification
In 1997, Simpson's classification of mammals was revised by Malcolm C. McKenna and Susan K. Bell. The Classification of Mammals Above the species level, here referred to as the "McKenna/Bell classification", is a comprehensive work on the systematics, relationships, and occurrences of all mammal taxa, living and extinct, down through the rank of genus. The authors worked together as paleontologists at the American Museum of Natural History, New York. McKenna inherited the project from Simpson and, with Bell, constructed a completely updated hierarchical system, covering living and extinct taxa that reflects the historical genealogy of Mammalia.
The McKenna/Bell hierarchical listing of all of the terms used for mammal groups above the species includes extinct mammals as well as modern groups, and introduces some fine distinctions such as legions and sublegions and ranks which fall between classes and orders that are likely to be glossed over by the layman.
Click on the highlighted link for a table comparing the traditional and the new McKenna/Bell classifications of mammals.
Extinct groups are represented by †.
Subclass Prototheria
(monotremes)

Order Platypoda: platypuses
Family Ornithorhynchidae: platypuses
Order Tachyglossa: echidnas (spiny anteaters)
Family Tachyglossidae: echidnas
Subclass TheriiformesLuo, Kielan-Jaworowska, and Cifelli classification
Several important fossil mammal discoveries have been made that have led researchers to question many of the relationships proposed by McKenna et al. (1997). Additionally, researchers are subjecting taxonomic hypotheses to more rigorous cladistic analyses of early mammal fossils. Luo et al. (2002) summarized existing ideas and proposed new ideas of relationships among mammals at the most basal level. They argued that the term mammal should be defined based on characters (especially the dentary-squamosal jaw articulation) instead of a crown-based definition (the group that contains most recent common ancestor of monotremes and therians and all of its descendants). Their definition of Mammalia is roughly equal to the Mammaliaformes as defined by McKenna et al. and other authors. They also define their taxonomic levels as clades and do not apply Linnean hierarchies.
Mammalia

†Sinoconodon - earliest and most basal of mammals
Unnamed clade 1 - a clade that contains all other mammals. These are characterized by determinant growth and occlusal features of the cheek teeth.
†Morganucodontidae - morganucodontids, including †Morganucodon, †Megazostrodon, and others
†Docodonta - docodonts, including †Haldanodon and †Castorocauda (Ji et al., 2006)
Unnamed clade 2 - a clade containing all living mammals and some fossil relatives. It is characterized by the loss of a postdentary trough and a widened braincase.
†Hadrocodium
†Kuehneotherium
Crown-group Mammalia - the group that contains most recent common ancestor of monotremes and therians and all of its descendants. This group is defined by additional characters relating the occlusion of molars and the presence of a well-developed masseteric fossa.
Australosphenida - a clade that contains monotremes and their fossil relatives. These fossils include †Ambondro, †Asfaltomylos, †Ausktribosphenos, and †Bishops. If correct, this clade represents an independent evolution of the tribosphenic molar in southern continents.
Trechnotheria - Therians, spalacotheriids and their relatives. They are characterized by features of the scapula, tibia, and humerus.
†Spalacotheriidae - including Akidolestes, Zhangheotherium, and Maotherium.
Cladotheria - Therians, dryolestids, and their relatives. They are characterized by features of the tribosphenic molar and the angular process of the dentary.
†Dryolestidae
†Amphitherium - incertae sedis (it may be a prototribosphenidan)
Prototribosphenida - Therians and fossil relatives including †Vincelestes. Characterized by features of the cochlea including coiling.
†Vincelestes
Zatheria - Therians and fossil relatives including the "peramurids". Characterized by the presence of wear in the talonid of the lower molars.
†"Peramuridae" - †Peramus and relatives. Known only from preserved mandibles and distinctly zatherian molars.
Boreosphenida - Therians and fossil relatives including †Kielantherium. They are characterized by molar features.
†Kielantherium
†Deltatheroida including †Deltatheridium - incertae sedis (it may represent a metatherian)
Crown-group Theria - the group that contains most recent common ancestor of marsupials and placentals and all of its descendants. Characterized by a host of molar features, aspects of the alispenoid, and aspects of the astragalus region.
†Eutriconodonta - incertae sedis. Triconodonts appear to be a member of the crown-Mammalia clade, but their relationships within it are unknown. It is also not certain that they represent a monophyletic group. Examples include Repenomamus.
†Multituberculata - incertae sedis. Luo et al. (2002) argue that multituberculates cannot be confidently placed in a particular clade of mammals. They suggest that they represent either basal mammals or are sister to the Trechnotheria.
Simplified classification for non-specialists
The following classification is a simplified version based on current understanding suitable for non-specialists who want to understand how living genera are related to each other. It appears to be based on the classification of McKenna et al. and the revisions proposed by Luo et al., after extinct groups have been removed. The classification ignores differences in levels and thus cannot be used to estimate the respective distances between taxa. English names are preferred whenever they exist. This makes it especially suited for non-specialists who wish to gain an easy overview. For the full picture, the non-simplified versions above should be consulted (see McKenna/Bell classification and Luo, Kielan-Jaworowska, and Cifelli classification).

Monotremes (prototheria): echidnas and platypus
Platypus (ornithorhynchids)
Echidnas (tachyglossids)
Live-bearing mammals (theria)
Marsupials
Opossums (didelphids)
Shrew opossums (caenolestids)
Australodelphia: Australian marsupials and monito del Monte
Monito del Monte
Dasyuromorphs
Dasyurids: antechinuses, quolls, dunnarts, Tasmanian devil, and allies
Numbat
Peramelemorphs: bilbies and bandicoots
Bilbies (thylacomyids)
Bandicoots (peramelids)
Marsupial moles (notoryctids)
Diprotodonts
Koala
Wombats (vombatids)
Phalangerids: brushtail possums and cuscuses
Pygmy possums (burramyids)
Honey possum
Petaurids: striped and Leadbeater's possums, and yellow-bellied, suger, mahogany and squirrel glider
Ringtailed possums (pseudocheirids)
Potorids: potoroos, rat kangaroos and bettongs
Acrobatids: feathertail glider and feather-tailed possum
Musky rat-kangaroo
Macropods: kangaroos, wallabies and allies
Placentals
Atlantic placentals (atlantogenatans)
Afroplacentals (afrotherians)
Afroinsectiphilians: elephant shrews, tenrecs, otter shrews, golden moles, and aardvark
Elephant shrews (macroscelidids)
Afrosoricids: tenrecs and golden moles
Tenrecids: tenrecs and otter shrews
Golden moles (chrysochlorids)
Aardvark
Paenungulates: hyraxes, elephants, dugongs and manatees
Hyraxes or dassies (procaviids)
Elephants (elephantids)
Sirenians: dugong and manatees
Dugong
Manatees (trichechids)
Xenarthrans
Pilosans: sloths and anteaters
Anteaters (vermilinguans)
Silky anteater
Myrmecophagids: giant anteater and tamanduas
Sloths (folivorans)
Three-toed sloths (bradypodids)
Two-toed sloths (megalonychids)
Armadillos (dasypodids)
Northern placentals (boreoeutherians)
Supraprimates (euarchontoglires)
Euarchontans: treeshrews, colugos and primates
Treeshrews (scandentians)
Tupaiids: all treeshrews except pen-tailed
Pen-tailed treeshrew
Colugos or flying lemurs (cynocephalids)
Primates
Strepsirrhines: lemur- and loris-like primates
Lemur-like primates (lemuriforms)
Cheirogaleids: dwarf lemurs and mouse-lemurs
Aye-aye
True lemurs (lemurids)
Sportive lemurs (lepilemurids)
Indriids: woolly lemurs and allies
Loris-like primates (lorisiforms)
Lorisids: lorises, pottos and allies
Galagos (galagids)
Haplorhines: tarsiers, monkeys and apes
Tarsiers (tarsiids)
Anthropoid primates
New World monkeys (platyrrhines)
Callitrichids: marmosets and tamarins
Cebids: capuchins and squirrel monkeys
Aotids: night or owl monkeys
Pitheciids: titis, sakis and uakaris
Atelids: howler, spider, woolly spider, and woolly monkeys
Catarrhines
Old World monkeys (cercopithecids)
Hominoid primates
Gibbons (hylobatids)
Great apes (hominids): incl. Humans
Glires: pikas, rabbits, hares, and rodents
Lagomorphs: pikas, rabbits and hares
Leporids: rabbits and hares
Pikas (ochotonids)
Rodents
Anomalure-like rodents (anomaluromorphs): Scaly-tailed squirrels and springhares
Scaly-tailed squirrels or anomalures (anomalurids)
Springhares (pedetids)
Beaver-like rodents (castorimorphs)
Beavers (castorids)
Gopher-like rodents (geomyoid rodents)
Pocket or true gophers (geomyids)
Heteromyids: kangaroo rats and kangaroo mice
Porcupine-like rodents (hystricomorphs)
Laotian rock rat
Gundis (ctenodactylids)
Hystricognaths
African mole rats (bathyergids)
Old World porcupines (hystricids)
Dassie rat
Cane rats (thryonomyids)
Cavy-like rodents (caviomorphs)
Chinchilla rats (abrocomids)
Hutias (capromyids)
Cavies (caviids): incl. Guinea pigs and capybara
Chinchillids: chinchillas and viscachas
Tuco-tucos (ctenomyids)
Agoutis (dasyproctids)
Pacas (cuniculids)
Pacarana
Spiny rats (echymyids)
New World porcupines (erethizontids)
Myocastorids: nutria and coypu
Octodonts (octodontids): Andean rock-rats, degus and viscacha-rats
Mouse-like rodents (myomorphs)
Dipodids: jerboas and jumping mice
Muroid rodents
Mouse-like hamsters (calomyscids)
Cricetids: hamsters, New World rats and mice, voles
Murids: true mice and rats, gerbils, spiny mice, crested rat
Nesomyids: climbing mice, rock mice, white-tailed rat, Malagasy rats and mice
Spiny dormice (platacanthomyids)
Spalacids: mole rats, bamboo rats, and zokors
Squirrel-like rodents (sciuromorphs)
Mountain beaver
Dormice (glirids)
Squirrels (sciurids): incl. chipmunks, prairie dogs, and marmots
Laurasian placentals (laurasiatherians)
Eulipotyphlans: hedgehogs, moles, shrews, solenodons
Hedgehogs (erinaceids)
Shrews (soricids)
Moles (talpids)
Solenodons (solenodontids)
Ferungulates: ungulates, cetaceans, bats, pangolins and carnivorans
Cetartiodactyls: even-toed ungulates and cetaceans
Camelids: camels and llamas
Swine (suinans): pigs and peccaries
Pigs (suids)
Peccaries (tayassuids)
Cetruminantians: cetaceans, hippos and ruminants
Cetancodonts: cetaceans and hippos
Cetaceans: Whales, dolphins and porpoises
Baleen whales (mysticetes)
Balaenids: right whales and bowhead whale
Rorquals (balaenopterids)
Gray whale
Pygmy right whale
Toothed whales (odontocetes)
Dolphins (delphinids)
Monodontids: beluga and narwhal
Beluga
Narwhal
Porpoises (phocoenids)
Sperm whale
Kogiids: pygmy and dwarf sperm whale
River dolphins (platanistoid whales)
Iniids: Amazon and Bolivian river dolphin
La Plata dolphin
Platanistids: Ganges and Indus river dolphins
Beaked whales (ziphids)
Hippos (hippopotamids)
Ruminantiamorphs: chevrotains, pronghorn, giraffes, musk deer, deer, and bovids
Chevrotains (tragulids)
Pecorans
Pronghorn
Giraffids: giraffe and okapi
Musk deer (moschids)
Deer (cervids)
Bovids: cattle, goats, sheep and antelope
Pegasoferans: bats, odd-toed ungulates, pangolins and carnivorans
Bats (chiropterans)
Megabats (pteropodids)
Microbats (microchiropterans)
Sac-winged or sheath-tailed bats (emballonurids)
Rhinopomatoid bats
Mouse-tailed bats (rhinopomatids)
Bumblebee bat or Kitti's hog-nosed bat
Rhinolophoid bats
Horseshoe bats (rhinolophids)
Hollow-faced or slit-faced bats (nycterids)
False vampires (megadermatids)
Vesper bats or evening bats (vespertilionids)
Molossoid bats
Free-tailed bats (molossids)
Pallid bats (antrozoids)
Nataloid bats
Funnel-eared bats (natalids)
Sucker-footed bats (myzopodids)
Disc-winged bats (thyropterids)
Smoky bats (furipterids)
Noctilionoid bats
Bulldog or fisherman bats (noctilionids)
New Zealand short-tailed bats (mystacinids)
Ghost-faced or moustached bats (mormoopids)
Leaf-nosed bats (phyllostomids)
Zooamatans: odd-toed ungulates, pangolins and carnivorans
Odd-toed ungulates (perissodactyls)
Horses (equids)
Ceratomorphs
Tapirs (tapirids)
Rhinoceroses (rhinocerotids)
Ferans
Pangolins or scaly anteaters (manids)
Carnivorans
Cat-like carnivorans (feliforms)
African palm civet
Feloid carnivorans
Asiatic linsangs (prionodontids)
Cats (felids)
Viverroid carnivorans
Viverrids: civets and allies
Herpestoid carnivorans
Hyaenids: hyenas and aardwolf
Malagasy carnivorans (euplerids)
Herpestids: mongooses and allies
Dog-like carnivorans (caniforms)
Canids: dogs and allies
Arctoid carnivorans
Bears (ursids)
Musteloid carnivorans
Red panda
Mephitids: skunks and stink badgers
Mustelids: weasels, martens, badgers, wolverines, minks, ferrets and otters
Procyonids: raccoons and allies
Pinnipeds
Walrus
Otariids: sea lions, eared seals, fur seals
True seals (phocids)


Teeth are common to most vertebrates, but mammalian teeth are distinctive in having a variety of shapes and functions. This feature first arose among early therapsids during the Permian, and has continued to the present day. All therapsid groups with the exception of the mammals are now extinct, but each of these groups possessed different tooth patterns, which aids with the classification of fossils.
Most extant mammals including humans are diphyodonts, i.e. they have an early set of deciduous teeth and a later set of permanent or "adult" teeth. Notable exceptions are elephants, kangaroos, and manatees, all of which are polyphyodonts, i.e. having teeth that are continuously being replaced.
Mammal teeth include incisors, canines, premolars, and molars, not all of which are present in all mammals. Various evolutionary modifications have occurred, such as the lack of canines in Glires, the development of tusks from either incisors (elephants) or canines (pigs and walruses), the adaptation of molars into flesh-shearing carnassials in Carnivora, and others.
Diversity
The extant mammalian infraclasses each have a set dental formula; the Eutheria (placentals) commonly have three pairs of molars and four premolars per jaw, whereas the Metatheria (marsupials) generally have four pairs of molars and between three or two premolars. For example, the tiger quoll (Dasyurus maculatus) is a dasyurid marsupial native to Australia. The quoll possesses four upper incisors and three lower incisors per left and right-hand side [I = 14]; two upper premolars [PM] and two lower premolars per side [PM = 8]; and four upper and four lower molars per side [M = 16], giving the animal a complement of thirty-eight teeth. The tiger quoll's dental formula is therefore as follows:
4.1.2-3.43.1.2-3.4.
Rabbits
Rabbits and other lagomorphs usually shed their deciduous teeth before (or very shortly after) their birth, and are usually born with their permanent teeth. The teeth of rabbits complement their diet, which consist of a wide range of vegetation. Since many of the foods are abrasive enough to cause attrition, rabbit teeth grow continuously throughout life. Rabbits have a dental formula of 2.0.3.31.0.2.2. There are no canines. Three to four millimeters of tooth is worn away by incisors every week, whereas the posterior teeth require a month to wear away the same amount.
Anatomy of rabbit teeth
The incisors and cheek teeth of rabbits are called aradicular hypsodont teeth. Aradicular teeth never form a true root with an apex, and hypsodont teeth have a high crown to root ratio (providing more room for wear and tear). This is sometimes referred to as an elodont dentition, meaning ever-growing. These teeth grow or erupt continuously. The growth or eruption is held in balance by dental abrasion from chewing a diet high in fiber.
Rodents
Like those of rabbits, rodents' incisors grow continuously throughout their lives, and are both aradicular and hypsodont. Unlike humans whose ameloblasts die after tooth development, rodents continually produce enamel and must wear down their teeth by gnawing on various materials. These teeth are used for cutting wood, biting through the skin of fruit, or for defense. The teeth have enamel on the outside, which is often orange-yellow due to the incorporation of iron-containing pigments, and exposed dentin on the inside, so they self-sharpen during gnawing. On the other hand, continually growing molars are found in some rodent species, such as the sibling vole and the guinea pig. There is variation in the dentition of the rodents, but generally, rodents lack canines and premolars, and have a space between their incisors and molars, called the diastema region.
HumansAfrotheriansElephants
The tusks of an elephant are specialized incisors for digging food up and fighting.  Elephants are polyphyodonts whose teeth are similar to those of manatees, and it is notable that elephants are believed to have undergone an aquatic phase in their evolution.
Elephants have four molars, one on each side of the upper and lower jaw. Until age 40, these are replaced by larger molars. The new molars shift forward from the back of the jaw as the old wear down. The final set of molars last for about twenty years.
Manatees
Manatees are polyphyodonts with mandibular molars developing separately from the jaw and are encased in a bony shell separated by soft tissue.
Aardvarks
In aardvarks, teeth lack enamel and have many pulp tubules, hence the name of the order Tubulidentata.
UngulatesHorses
An adult horse has between 36 and 44 teeth.  All horses have twelve premolars, twelve molars, and twelve incisors.  Generally, all male equines also have four canine teeth (called tushes) between the molars and incisors.  However, few female horses (less than 28%) have canines, and those that do usually have only one or two, which many times are only partially erupted.  A few horses have one to four wolf teeth, which are vestigial premolars, with most of those having only one or two. They are equally common in male and female horses and much more likely to be on the upper jaw.  If present these can cause problems as they can interfere with the horse's bit contact. Therefore, wolf teeth are commonly removed.
Horse teeth can be used to estimate the animal's age.  Between birth and five years, age can be closely estimated by observing the eruption pattern on milk teeth and then permanent teeth.  By age five, all permanent teeth have usually erupted. The horse is then said to have a "full" mouth.  After the age of five, age can only be conjectured by study of the wear patterns on the incisors, shape, the angle at which the incisors meet, and other factors. The wear of teeth may also be affected by diet, natural abnormalities, and cribbing.  Two horses of the same age may have different wear patterns.
A horse's incisors, premolars, and molars, once fully developed, continue to erupt as the grinding surface is worn down through chewing. A young adult horse will have teeth which are 4.5-5 inches long, with the majority of the crown remaining below the gumline in the dental socket. The rest of the tooth will slowly emerge from the jaw, erupting about 1/8" each year, as the horse ages. When the animal reaches old age, the crowns of the teeth are very short and the teeth are often lost altogether. Very old horses, if lacking molars, may need to have their fodder ground up and soaked in water to create a soft mush for them to eat in order to obtain adequate nutrition.
Pigs
Tusks, which grow larger in males and in wild boars, are derived from the canine teeth, a trait shared with warthogs.
Cetaceans
The toothed whales, comprising the Odontoceti parvorder of the cetaceans, are differentiated from the baleen whales by the presence of their teeth. The number of teeth and their function can vary widely between species, with some dolphins having over a hundred teeth in their jaws, while the narwhal has two functional teeth in its upper jaw which grow into long tusks in males. The tusk is used in feeding, navigation and mating and contains millions of sensory pathways, making it the most neurologically complex tooth known. In contrast, the sperm whale has up to forty teeth in its bottom jaw and none functional in its upper.
Carnivorans
In the order Carnivora, many different diets are not always meat. Carnivores possess diverse carnassial teeth. The carnassials are specialized teeth for different diets of different animals. These teeth are used to cut through flesh. Either the molars or both the premolars and molars in combination may be adapted into shearing carnassials. Tooth roots can be great indicators of diets.  In a study done on the bear tooth root area, it was found that the amount of space a tooth root took up was an indicator of the bite force required from the species. For example, Panda teeth had the deepest root systems because of their bamboo diet. Ursidae  (bears) is not the only carnivorous family whose root area has been studied. It has been found that in general, carnivore tooth roots are highly dependent on their diets.
Walrus
Walrus tusks are canine teeth that grow continuously throughout life.
Dogs
In dogs, the teeth are less likely than humans to form dental cavities because of the very high pH of dog saliva, which prevents enamel from demineralizing.


In many animals, a penis (; pl.: penises or penes) is the male sexual organ used to inseminate females (or hermaphrodites) during copulation. Such organs occur in both vertebrates and invertebrates, but males do not bear a penis in every animal species. Furthermore, penises are not necessarily homologous.
The term penis applies to many intromittent organs, but not to all. As an example, the intromittent organ of most Cephalopoda is the hectocotylus, a specialized arm, and male spiders use their pedipalps. Even within the Vertebrata, there are morphological variants with specific terminology, such as hemipenes.
In most species of animals in which there is an organ that might be described as a penis, it has no major function other than intromission, or at least conveying the sperm to the female, but in the placental mammals, the penis bears the distal part of the urethra, which discharges both urine during urination and semen during copulation.
Vertebrates
The last common ancestor of all living amniotes (mammals, birds and reptiles) likely possessed a penis.
Birds
Most male birds (e.g., roosters and turkeys) have a cloaca (also present on the female), but not a penis. Among bird species with a penis are paleognathes (tinamous and ratites) and Anatidae (ducks, geese and swans). A bird penis is different in structure from mammal penises, being an erectile expansion of the cloacal wall and being erected by lymph, not blood. It is usually partially feathered and in some species features spines and brush-like filaments, and in flaccid state curls up inside the cloaca.
While most male birds have no external genitalia, male waterfowl (Anatidae) have a phallus. Most birds mate with the males balancing on top of the females and touching cloacas in a "cloacal kiss"; this makes forceful insemination very difficult. The phallus that male waterfowl have evolved everts out of their bodies (in a clockwise coil) and aids in inseminating females without their cooperation. The male waterfowl evolution of a phallus to forcefully copulate with females has led to counteradaptations in females in the form of vaginal structures called dead end sacs and clockwise coils. These structures make it harder for males to achieve intromission. The clockwise coils are significant because the male phallus everts out of their body in a counter-clockwise spiral; therefore, a clockwise vaginal structure would impede forceful copulation. Studies have shown that the longer a male's phallus is, the more elaborate the vaginal structures were.

The lake duck is notable for possessing, in relation to body length, the longest penis of all vertebrates; the penis, which is typically coiled up in flaccid state, can reach about the same length as the animal himself when fully erect, but is more commonly about half the bird's length. It is theorized that the remarkable size of their spiny penises with bristled tips may have evolved in response to competitive pressure in these highly promiscuous birds, removing sperm from previous matings in the manner of a bottle brush. The lake duck has a corkscrew shaped penis.
Male and female emus are similar in appearance, although the male's penis can become visible when he defecates.
The male tinamou has a corkscrew shaped penis, similar to those of the ratites and to the hemipenis of some reptiles. Females have a small phallic organ in the cloaca which becomes larger during the breeding season.
Mammals
As with any other bodily attribute, the length and girth of the penis can be highly variable between mammals of different species. In many mammals, the size of a flaccid penis is smaller than its erect size.
A bone called the baculum is present in most mammals but absent in humans, cattle and horses.
In mammals, the penis is divided into three parts:

Roots (crura): these begin at the caudal border of the pelvic ischial arch.
Body: the part of the penis extending from the roots.
Glans: the free end of the penis.
The internal structures of the penis consist mainly of cavernous, erectile tissue, which is a collection of blood sinusoids separated by sheets of connective tissue (trabeculae). Some mammals have a lot of erectile tissue relative to connective tissue, for example horses. Because of this a horse's penis can enlarge more than a bull's penis. The urethra is on the ventral side of the body of the penis. As a general rule, a mammal's penis is proportional to its body size, but this varies greatly between species – even between closely related ones. For example, an adult gorilla's erect penis is about 4.5 cm (1.8 in) in length; an adult chimpanzee, significantly smaller (in body size) than a gorilla, has a penis size about double that of the gorilla. In comparison, the human penis is larger than that of any other primate, both in proportion to body size and in absolute terms.
Artiodactyls
The penises of even-toed ungulates are curved in an S-shape when not erect. In bulls, rams and boars, the sigmoid flexure of the penis straightens out during erection.
When mating, the tip of a male pronghorn's penis is often the first part to touch the female pronghorn. The pronghorn's penis is about 13 cm (5 in) long, and is shaped like an ice pick. The front of a pronghorn's glans penis is relatively flat, while the back is relatively thick. The male pronghorn usually ejaculates immediately after intromission.
The penis of a dromedary camel is covered by a triangular penile sheath opening backwards, and is about 60 cm (24 in) long. The camelmen often aid the male to enter his penis into the female's vulva, though the male is considered able to do it on his own. Copulation time ranges from 7 to 35 minutes, averaging 11–15 minutes.

Bulls have a fibro-elastic penis. Given the small amount of erectile tissue, there is little enlargement after erection. The penis is quite rigid when non-erect, and becomes even more rigid during erection. Protrusion is not affected much by erection, but more by relaxation of the retractor penis muscle and straightening of the sigmoid flexure.
The male genitalia of mouse deer are similar to those of pigs. A boar's penis, which rotates rhythmically during copulation, is about 46 cm (18 in) long, and ejaculates about a pint of semen. Wild boars have a roughly egg-sized sack near the opening of the penis, which collects urine and emits a sharp odour. The purpose of this is not fully understood.
Deer
A stag's penis forms an S-shaped curve when it is not erect, and is retracted into its sheath by the retractor penis muscle. Some deer species spray urine on their bodies by urinating from an erect penis. One type of scent-marking behavior in elk is known as "thrash-urination, which typically involves palpitation of the erect penis. A male elk's urethra points upward so that urine is sprayed almost at a right angle to the penis. A sambar stag will mark himself by spraying urine directly in the face with a highly mobile penis, which is often erect during its rutting activities. Red deer stags often have erect penises during combat.
Cetaceans
Cetaceans' reproductive organs are located inside the body. Male cetaceans (whales, dolphins, and porpoises) have two slits, the genital groove concealing the penis and one further behind for the anus. Cetaceans have fibroelastic penises, similar to those of Artiodactyla. The tapering tip of the cetacean penis is called the pars intrapraeputialis or terminal cone. The blue whale has the largest penis of any organism on the planet, typically measuring 2.4–3.0 m (8–10 ft). Accurate measurements are difficult to take because its erect length can only be observed during mating, which occurs underwater. The penis on a right whale can be up to 2.7 m (8.9 ft) – the testicles, at up to 2 m (6 ft 7 in) in length, 78 cm (2 ft 7 in) in diameter, and weighing up to 238 kg (525 lb), are also by far the largest of any animal on Earth.
On at least one occasion, a dolphin towed bathers through the water by hooking his erect penis around them. Between captive male dolphins—including bottlenose dolphins and Amazon river dolphins—homosexual behaviour includes rubbing of genitals against each other, which sometimes leads to the males swimming belly to belly, inserting the penis in the other's genital slit and sometimes anus.
Perissodactyls
 Stallions (male horses) have a vascular penis. When non-erect, it is quite flaccid and contained within the prepuce (foreskin, or sheath).
Tapirs have exceptionally long penises relative to their body size. The glans of the Malayan tapir resembles a mushroom, and is similar to the glans of the horse.  The penis of the Sumatran rhinoceros contains two lateral lobes and a structure called the processus glandis.
Carnivores
All members of Carnivora (except hyenas) have a baculum. Canine penises have a structure at the base called the bulbus glandis.
During copulation, the spotted hyena inserts his penis through the female's pseudo-penis instead of directly through the vagina, which is blocked by the false scrotum and testicles. Once the female retracts her clitoris, the male enters the female by sliding beneath her, an operation facilitated by the penis' upward angle. The pseudo-penis closely resembles the male hyena's penis, but can be distinguished from the male's genitalia by its greater thickness and more rounded glans. In male spotted hyenas, as well as females, the base of the glans is covered with penile spines.
Domestic cats have barbed penises, with about 120–150 one millimeter long backwards-pointing spines. Upon withdrawal of the penis, the spines rake the walls of the female's vagina, which is a trigger for ovulation. Lions also have barbed penises. Male felids urinate backwards by curving the tip of the glans penis backward. When male cheetahs urine-mark their territories, they stand one meter away from a tree or rock surface with the tail raised, pointing the penis either horizontally backward or 60° upward.
The male fossa has an unusually long penis and baculum (penis bone), reaching to between his front legs when erect with backwards-pointing spines along most of its length. The male fossa has scent glands near the penis, with the penile glands emitting a strong odor.
The beech marten's penis is larger than the pine marten's, with the bacula of young beech martens often outsizing those of old pine martens.
Raccoons have penis bones which bend at a 90 degree angle at the tip. The extrusibility of a raccoon's penis can be used to distinguish mature males from immature males.
Male walruses possess the largest penis bones of any land mammal, both in absolute size and relative to body size.
The adult male American mink's penis is 5.6 cm (2+1⁄4 in) long, and is covered by a sheath. The baculum is well-developed, being triangular in cross section and curved at the tip.
Bats
Males of Racey's pipistrelle bat have a long, straight penis with a notch between the shaft and the narrow, egg-shaped glans penis. Near the top, the penis is haired, but the base is almost naked. In the baculum (penis bone), the shaft is long and narrow and slightly curved. The length of the penis and baculum distinguish P. raceyi from all comparably sized African and Malagasy vespertilionids. In males, penis length is 9.6 to 11.8 mm (3⁄8 to 15⁄32 in) and baculum length is 8.8 to 10.0 mm (11⁄32 to 13⁄32 in).
Copulation by male greater short-nosed fruit bats is dorsoventral and the females lick the shaft or the base of the male's penis, but not the glans which has already penetrated the vagina. While the females do this, the penis is not withdrawn and research has shown a positive relationship between length of the time that the penis is licked and the duration of copulation. Post copulation genital grooming has also been observed.
Rodents
The glans penis of the marsh rice rat is long and robust, averaging 7.3 mm (9⁄32 in) long and 4.6 mm (3⁄16 in) broad, and the baculum (penis bone) is 6.6 mm (1⁄4 in) long. As is characteristic of Sigmodontinae, the marsh rice rat has a complex penis, with the distal (far) end of the baculum ending in three digits. The central digit is notably larger than those at the sides. The outer surface of the penis is mostly covered by small spines, but there is a broad band of nonspinous tissue. The papilla (nipple-like projection) on the dorsal (upper) side of the penis is covered with small spines, a character the marsh rice rat shares only with Oligoryzomys and Oryzomys couesi among oryzomyines examined. On the urethral process, located in the crater at the end of the penis, a fleshy process (the subapical lobule) is present; it is absent in all other oryzomyines with studied penes except O. couesi and Holochilus brasiliensis. The baculum is deeper than it is wide.
In Transandinomys talamancae, the outer surface of the penis is mostly covered by small spines, but there is a broad band of nonspinous tissue.
Some features of the accessory glands in the male genital region vary among oryzomyines. In Transandinomys talamancae, a single pair of preputial glands is present at the penis. As is usual for sigmodontines, there are two pairs of ventral prostate glands and a single pair of anterior and dorsal prostate glands. Part of the end of the vesicular gland is irregularly folded, not smooth as in most oryzomyines.
In Pseudoryzomys, the baculum (penis bone) displays large protuberances at the sides. In the cartilaginous part of the baculum, the central digit is smaller than those at the sides.
In Drymoreomys, there are three digits at the tip of the penis, of which the central one is the largest.
In Thomasomys ucucha, the glans penis is rounded, short, and small and is superficially divided into left and right halves by a trough at the top and a ridge at the bottom.
The glans penis of a male cape ground squirrel is large with a prominent baculum.
Unlike other squirrel species, red squirrels have long, thin, and narrow penises, without a prominent baculum.
Winkelmann's mouse can easily be distinguished from its close relatives by the shape of its penis, which has a partially corrugated glans.
The foreskin of a capybara is attached to the anus in an unusual way, forming an anogenital invagination.
Primates
It has been postulated that the shape of the human penis may have been selected by sperm competition. The shape could have favored displacement of seminal fluids implanted within the female reproductive tract by rival males: the thrusting action which occurs during sexual intercourse can mechanically remove seminal fluid out of the cervix area from a previous mating.
The penile morphology of some types of strepsirrhine primates has provided information about their taxonomy. Male galago species possess very distinctive penile morphology that can be used to classify species.
The northern greater galago penis is on average 18 mm (11⁄16 in) in length, with doubled headed or even tridentate spines pointing towards the body. They are less densely packed than in Otolemur crassicaudatus. The penis of the ring-tailed lemur is nearly cylindrical in shape and is covered in small spines, as well as having two pairs of larger spines on both sides.
The adult male of each vervet monkey species has a pale blue scrotum and a red penis, and male proboscis monkeys have a red penis with a black scrotum.
Male baboons and squirrel monkeys sometimes gesture with an erect penis as both a warning of impending danger and a threat to predators. In male squirrel monkeys, this gesture is used for social communication.
Humans
The human penis is an external sex organ of  male humans. It is a reproductive, intromittent organ that additionally serves as the urinal duct. The main parts are the root of the penis (radix): It is the attached part, consisting of the bulb of penis in the middle and the crus of penis, one on either side of the bulb; the body of the penis (corpus); and the epithelium of the penis consists of the shaft skin, the foreskin, and the preputial mucosa on the inside of the foreskin and covering the glans penis.
The human penis is made up of three columns of tissue: two corpora cavernosa lie next to each other on the dorsal side and one corpus spongiosum lies between them on the ventral side. The urethra, which is the last part of the urinary tract, traverses the corpus spongiosum, and its opening, known as the meatus, lies on the tip of the glans penis. It is a passage both for urine and for the ejaculation of semen.
In males, the expulsion of urine from the body is done through the penis. The urethra drains the bladder through the prostate gland, where it is joined by the ejaculatory duct, and then onward to the penis.
An erection is the stiffening and rising of the penis, which occurs during sexual arousal, though it can also happen in non-sexual situations. Ejaculation is the ejecting of semen from the penis and is usually accompanied by orgasm. A series of muscular contractions delivers semen, containing male gametes known as sperm cells or spermatozoa, from the penis.
The most common form of genital alteration is circumcision, the removal of part or all of the foreskin for various cultural, religious, and more rarely medical reasons. There is controversy surrounding circumcision.
As of 2015, a systematic review of 15,521 men, who were measured by health professionals rather than themselves, concluded that the average length of an erect human penis is 13.12 cm (5.17 inches) long, while the average circumference of an erect human penis is 11.66 cm (4.59 inches).
Marsupials
Most marsupials, except for the two largest species of kangaroos and marsupial moles (assuming the latter are true marsupials), have a bifurcated penis, separated into two columns, so that the penis has two ends corresponding to the females' two vaginas.
Monotremes
Monotremes and marsupial moles are the only mammals in which the penis is located inside the cloaca.
Male echidnas have a bilaterally symmetrical, rosette-like, four-headed penis. During mating, the heads on one side "shut down" and do not grow in size; the other two are used to release semen into the female's two-branched reproductive tract. The heads used are swapped each time the mammal copulates. When not in use, the penis is retracted inside a preputial sac in the cloaca. The male echidna's penis is 7 cm (3 in) long when erect, and its shaft is covered with penile spines. The penis is nearly a quarter of his body length when erect.
Others
The penis of the bush hyrax is complex and distinct from that of the other hyrax genera. It has a short, thin appendage within a cup-like glans penis and measures greater than 6 cm (2+1⁄2 in) when erect. Additionally, it has been observed that the bush hyrax also has a greater distance between the anus and preputial opening in comparison to other hyraxes.

An adult elephant has the largest penis of any land animal. An elephant's penis can reach a length of 100 cm (40 in) and a diameter of 16 cm (6 in) at the base. It is S-shaped when fully erect and has a Y-shaped orifice. During musth, a male elephant may urinate with his penis still in the sheath, which causes the urine to spray on the hind legs. An elephant's penis is very mobile, being able to move independently of the male's pelvis, and the penis curves forward and upward prior to mounting another elephant.
In giant anteaters, the (retracted) penis and testicles are located internally between the rectum and urinary bladder.
When the male armadillo Chaetophractus villosus is sexually aroused, species determination is easier. Its penis can be as long as 35 mm (1+1⁄2 in), and usually remains completely withdrawn inside a skin receptacle. Scientists conducting studies on the C. villosus penis muscles revealed this species' very long penis exhibits variability. During its waking hours, it remains hidden beneath a skin receptacle, until it becomes erect and it projects outside in a rostral direction.
Fish and reptiles
Male turtles and crocodiles have a penis, while male specimens of the reptile order Squamata have two paired organs called hemipenes. Tuataras must use their cloacae for reproduction. Due to evolutionary convergence, turtle and mammal penises have a similar structure.
In some fish, the gonopodium, andropodium, and claspers are intromittent organs (to introduce sperm into the female) developed from modified fins.
InvertebratesArthropods
The record for the largest penis size to body size ratio is held by the barnacle. The barnacle's penis can grow to up to forty times its own body length. This enables them to reach the nearest female for fertilization.
A number of invertebrate species have independently evolved the mating technique of traumatic insemination where the penis penetrates the female's abdomen, thereby creating a womb into which it deposits sperm. This has been most fully studied in bed bugs.
Some millipedes have penises.  In these species, the penis is simply one or two projections on underneath the third body segment that produce a spermatophore or sperm packet. The act of insemination, however, occurs through specialized legs called gonopods which collect the spermatophore and insert it into the female.
Insects
In male insects, the structure analogous to a penis is known as aedeagus. The male copulatory organ of various lower invertebrate animals is often called the cirrus.
The lesser water boatman's mating call, generated by rubbing the penis against the abdomen, is the loudest sound, relative to body size, in the animal kingdom.
In 2010, entomologist Charles Linehard described Neotrogla, a new genus of barkflies. Species of this genus have sex-reversed genitalia. Females have penis-like organs called gynosomes that are inserted into vagina-like openings of males during mating.  In 2014, a detailed study of the insects reproductive habits led by Kazunori Yoshizawae confirmed that the organ functions similar to a penis – for example, it swells during sexual intercourse – and is used to extract sperm from the male.
Mollusks
The penis in most male coleoid cephalopods is a long and muscular end of the gonoduct used to transfer spermatophores to a modified arm called a hectocotylus. That, in turn, is used to transfer the spermatophores to the female. In species where the hectocotylus is missing, the penis is long and able to extend beyond the mantle cavity and transfers the spermatophores directly to the female. Deepwater squid have the greatest known penis length relative to body size of all mobile animals, second in the entire animal kingdom only to certain sessile barnacles. Penis elongation in Onykia ingens may result in a penis that is as long as the mantle, head and arms combined. Giant squid of the genus Architeuthis are unusual in that they possess both a large penis and modified arm tips, although it is uncertain whether the latter are used for spermatophore transfer.
Etymology
The word "penis" is taken from pēnis, a Latin word for tail sometimes used euphemistically to  mean penis. Some derive that from Indo-European *pesnis, and the Greek word πέος = "penis" from Indo-European *pesos. Prior to the adoption of the Latin word in English, the penis was referred to as a "yard". The Oxford English Dictionary cites an example of the word yard used in this sense from 1379, and notes that in his Physical Dictionary of 1684, Steven Blankaart defined the word penis as "the Yard, made up of two nervous Bodies, the Channel, Nut, Skin, and Fore-skin, etc."
As with nearly any aspect of the body involved in sexual or excretory functions, the penis is the subject of many slang words and euphemisms for it, a particularly common and enduring one being "cock". See WikiSaurus:penis for a list of alternative words for penis.
The Latin word "phallus" (from Greek φαλλος) is sometimes used to describe the penis, although "phallus" originally was used to describe representations, pictorial or carved, of the penis.
Heraldry
Pizzles are represented in heraldry, where the adjective pizzled (or vilené) indicates that part of an animate charge's anatomy, especially if coloured differently.


Monotremes () are mammals of the order Monotremata. They are the only mammals still in existence which lay eggs, rather than bearing live young. The five extant monotreme species are the platypus and the four species of echidnas. Monotremes are typified by structural differences in their brains, jaws, digestive tracts, reproductive tracts, and other body parts, compared to the more common mammalian types. Although they are different from other living mammals in that they lay eggs, female monotremes are like other mammals in that they nurse their young with milk.
Monotremes have been considered by some authors to be members of Australosphenida, a clade that contains extinct mammals from the Jurassic and Cretaceous of Madagascar, South America, and Australia, but this categorization is disputed and their taxonomy is under debate.
All extant species of monotremes are indigenous to Australia and New Guinea, although they were also present during the Late Cretaceous and Paleocene epochs in southern South America, implying that they were also present in Antarctica, though remains have not yet been found there.
The name monotreme derives from the Greek words μονός (monós 'single') and τρῆμα (trêma 'hole'), referring to the cloaca.
General characteristics
Like other mammals, monotremes are endothermic with a high metabolic rate, though not as high as other mammals; have hair on their bodies; produce milk through mammary glands to feed their young; have a single bone in their lower jaw; and have three middle ear bones.
In common with marsupials, monotremes lack the connective structure (corpus callosum) which in placentals is the primary communication route between the right and left brain hemispheres. The anterior commissure does provide an alternate communication route between the two hemispheres, though, and in monotremes and marsupials it carries all the commissural fibers arising from the neocortex, whereas in placental mammals the anterior commissure carries only some of these fibers.

Extant monotremes lack teeth as adults. Fossil forms and modern platypus young have a "tribosphenic" form of molars (with the occlusal surface formed by three cusps arranged in a triangle), which is one of the hallmarks of extant mammals. Some recent work suggests that monotremes acquired this form of molar independently of placentals and marsupials, although this hypothesis remains disputed. Tooth loss in modern monotremes might be related to their development of electrolocation.
Monotreme jaws are constructed somewhat differently from those of other mammals, and the jaw opening muscle is different. As in all true mammals, the tiny bones that conduct sound to the inner ear are fully incorporated into the skull, rather than lying in the jaw as in non-mammalian cynodonts and other pre-mammalian synapsids; this feature, too, is now claimed to have evolved independently in monotremes and therians, although, as with the analogous evolution of the tribosphenic molar, this hypothesis is disputed. Nonetheless, findings on the extinct species Teinolophos confirm that suspended ear bones evolved independently among monotremes and therians. The external opening of the ear still lies at the base of the jaw.
The sequencing of the platypus genome has also provided insight into the evolution of a number of monotreme traits, such as venom and electroreception, as well as showing some new unique features, such as monotremes possessing five pairs of sex chromosomes which collectively behave as a single XY sex-determination system — during spermatogenesis, the ten sex chromosomes of the male form an alternating chain of X and Y chromosomes that recombine at the ends of consecutive chromosomes, and all the X or all the Y chromosomes are inherited together. One of the X chromosomes resembles the Z chromosome of birds, suggesting that the two sex chromosomes of marsupial and placentals evolved after the split from the monotreme lineage. Additional reconstruction through shared genes in sex chromosomes supports this hypothesis of independent evolution. This feature, along with some other genetic similarities with birds, such as shared genes related to egg-laying, is thought to provide some insight into the most recent common ancestor of the synapsid lineage leading to mammals and the sauropsid lineage leading to birds and modern reptiles, which are believed to have split about 315 million years ago during the Carboniferous. The presence of vitellogenin genes (a protein necessary for egg yolk formation) is shared with birds; the presence of this symplesiomorphy suggests that the common ancestor of monotremes, marsupials, and placentals was oviparous, and that this trait was retained in monotremes but lost in all other extant mammal groups. DNA analyses suggest that although this trait is shared and is synapomorphic with birds, platypuses are still mammals and that the common ancestor of extant mammals lactated.
The monotremes also have extra bones in the shoulder girdle, including an interclavicle and coracoid, which are not found in other mammals. Monotremes retain a reptile-like gait, with legs on the sides of, rather than underneath, their bodies. The monotreme leg bears a spur in the ankle region; the spur is not functional in echidnas, but contains a powerful venom in the male platypus. This venom is derived from β-defensins, proteins that are present in mammals that create holes in viral and bacterial pathogens. Some reptile venom is also composed of different types of β-defensins, another trait shared with reptiles. It is thought to be an ancient mammalian characteristic, as many non-monotreme archaic mammal groups also possess venomous spurs.
Reproductive system
The key anatomical difference between monotremes and other mammals gives them their name; monotreme means "single opening" in Greek, referring to the single duct (the cloaca) for their urinary, defecatory, and reproductive systems. Like birds and reptiles, monotremes have a single cloaca. Marsupials have a separate genital tract, whereas most placental females have separate openings for reproduction (the vagina), urination (the urethra), and defecation (the anus). In monotremes, only semen passes through the penis while urine is excreted through the male's cloaca. The monotreme penis is similar to that of turtles and is covered by a preputial sac. Male monotremes do not have a prostate or seminal vesicles.
Monotreme eggs are retained for some time within the mother and receive nutrients directly from her, generally hatching within ten days after being laid – much shorter than the incubation period of sauropsid eggs. Much like newborn marsupials (and perhaps all non-placentals), newborn monotremes, called "puggles", are larval- and fetus-like and have relatively well-developed forelimbs that enable them to crawl around. Monotremes lack teats, so puggles crawl about more frequently than marsupial joeys in search of milk. This difference raises questions about the supposed developmental restrictions on marsupial forelimbs.
Rather than through teats, monotremes lactate from their mammary glands via openings in their skin. All five extant species show prolonged parental care of their young, with low rates of reproduction and relatively long life-spans.
Monotremes are also noteworthy in their zygotic development: most mammalian zygotes go through holoblastic cleavage, where the ovum splits into multiple, divisible daughter cells. In contrast, monotreme zygotes, like those of birds and reptiles, undergo meroblastic (partial) division. This means that the cells at the yolk's edge have cytoplasm continuous with that of the egg, allowing the yolk and embryo to exchange waste and nutrients with the surrounding cytoplasm.
Physiology
Monotremes' metabolic rate is remarkably low by mammalian standards. The platypus has an average body temperature of about 31 °C (88 °F) rather than the averages of 35 °C (95 °F) for marsupials and 37 °C (99 °F) for placentals. Research suggests this has been a gradual adaptation to the harsh, marginal environmental niches in which the few extant monotreme species have managed to survive, rather than a general characteristic of extinct monotremes.
Monotremes may have less developed thermoregulation than other mammals, but recent research shows that they easily maintain a constant body temperature in a variety of circumstances, such as the platypus in icy mountain streams. Early researchers were misled by two factors: firstly, monotremes maintain a lower average temperature than most mammals; secondly, the short-beaked echidna, much easier to study than the reclusive platypus, maintains normal temperature only when active; during cold weather, it conserves energy by "switching off" its temperature regulation. Understanding of this mechanism came when reduced thermal regulation was observed in the hyraxes, which are placentals.
The echidna was originally thought to experience no rapid eye movement sleep (REM). However, a more recent study showed that REM sleep accounted for about 15% of sleep time observed on subjects at an environmental temperature of 25 °C (77 °F). Surveying a range of environmental temperatures, the study observed very little REM at reduced temperatures of 15 °C (59 °F) and 20 °C (68 °F), and also a substantial reduction at the elevated temperature of 28 °C (82 °F).
Monotreme milk contains a highly expressed antibacterial protein not found in other mammals, perhaps to compensate for the more septic manner of milk intake associated with the absence of teats.
During the course of evolution, the monotremes have lost the gastric glands normally found in mammalian stomachs as an adaptation to their diet. As such, by some definitions, they do not have stomachs as an organ, although the term is widely used in studies of monotreme anatomy. Monotremes synthesize L-ascorbic acid only in the kidneys.
Both the platypus and echidna species have spurs on their hind limbs. The echidna spurs are vestigial and have no known function, while the platypus spurs contain venom. Molecular data show that the main component of platypus venom emerged before the divergence of platypus and echidnas, suggesting that the most recent common ancestor of these taxa was also possibly a venomous monotreme.
Taxonomy
The traditional "Theria hypothesis" states that the divergence of the monotreme lineage from the Metatheria (marsupial) and Eutheria (placental) lineages happened prior to the divergence between marsupials and placentals, and the early divergence explains why monotremes retain a number of primitive traits presumed to have been present in the synapsid ancestors of later mammals, such as egg-laying. Most morphological evidence supports the Theria hypothesis, but one possible exception is a similar pattern of tooth replacement seen in both monotremes and marsupials. This similarity originally provided the basis for the competing "Marsupionta" hypothesis, in which the divergence between monotremes and marsupials occurred later than the divergence between these lineages and the placentals. Van Rheede (2005) concluded that the genetic evidence favors the Theria hypothesis, and this hypothesis continues to be the more widely accepted one.
Monotremes are conventionally treated as comprising a single order Monotremata. The entire grouping is typically placed into a subclass Prototheria, which was extended to include several fossil orders; however, these are no longer seen as constituting a group allied to monotreme ancestry. A controversial hypothesis relates the monotremes to a separate assemblage of fossil mammals in a clade termed Australosphenida, a group of mammals from Jurassic and Cretaceous Madagascar, South America and Australia, that share tribosphenic molars. However, in a 2022 review of monotreme evolution, it was noted that Teinolophos, the oldest (Barremian ~ 125 million years ago) and the most primitive monotreme, differed substantially from non-monotreme australosphenidans in possessing five molars, as opposed to the three present in non-monotreme australosphenidians. Aptian and Cenomanian monotremes of the family Kollikodontidae (113–96.6 ma) have four molars. This suggests that the monotremes are likely to be unrelated to the australosphenidan tribosphenids.
The time when the monotreme line diverged from other mammalian lines is uncertain, but one survey of genetic studies gives an estimate of about 220 million years ago, while others have posited younger estimates of 163 to 186 million years ago (though the already eutherian Juramaia is dated to 161–160 million years ago). Teinolophos like modern monotremes displays adaptations to elongation and increased sensory perception in the jaws, related to mechanoreception or electroreception.

Molecular clock and fossil dating give a wide range of dates for the split between echidnas and platypuses, with one survey putting the split at 19–48 million years ago, but another putting it at 17–89 million years ago. It has been suggested that both the short-beaked and long-beaked echidna species are derived from a platypus-like ancestor.
The precise relationships among extinct groups of mammals and modern groups such as monotremes are uncertain, but cladistic analyses usually put the last common ancestor (LCA) of placentals and monotremes close to the LCA of placentals and multituberculates, whereas some suggest that the LCA of placentals and multituberculates was more recent than the LCA of placentals and monotremes.

ORDER MONOTREMATA
Superfamily Ornithorhynchoidea
Family Ornithorhynchidae: platypus
Genus Ornithorhynchus
Platypus, O. anatinus
Family Tachyglossidae: echidnas
Genus Tachyglossus
Short-beaked echidna, T. aculeatus
T. a. aculeatus (Common short-beaked echidna)
T. a. acanthion (Northern short-beaked echidna)
T. a. lawesii (New Guinea short-beaked echidna)
T. a. multiaculeatus (Kangaroo Island short-beaked echidna)
T. a. setosus (Tasmanian short-beaked echidna)
Genus Zaglossus
Sir David's long-beaked echidna, Z. attenboroughi
Eastern long-beaked echidna, Z. bartoni
Z. b. bartoni
Z. b. clunius
Z. b. diamondi
Z. b. smeenki
Western long-beaked echidna, Z. bruijni
Summary of extant speciesFossil monotremes
The first Mesozoic monotreme to be discovered was the Cenomanian (100–96.6 Ma) Steropodon galmani from Lightning Ridge, New South Wales. Biochemical and anatomical evidence suggests that the monotremes diverged from the mammalian lineage before the marsupials and placentals arose. The only Mesozoic monotremes are Teinolophos (Barremian, 126 Ma), Sundrius and Kryoryctes (Albian, 113–108 Ma), and Dharragarra, Kollikodon, Opalios, Parvopalus, Steropodon, and Stirtodon (all Cenomanian, 100.2–96.6 Ma) from Australian deposits, and Patagorhynchus (Maastrichtian) from Patagonian deposits in the Cretaceous, indicating that monotremes were diversifiying by the early Late Cretaceous. Monotremes have been found in the latest Cretaceous and Paleocene of southern South America, so one hypothesis is that monotremes arose in Australia in the Late Jurassic or Early Cretaceous, and that some migrated across the Antarctic land bridge to South America, both of which were still united with Australia at that time. This direction of migration is the opposite of that hypothesized for Australia's other dominant mammal group, the marsupials, which likely migrated across Antarctica to Australia from South America.
In 2024, a prominent assemblage of early monotremes was described from the Cenomanian deposits (100–96.6 Ma) of the Griman Creek Formation in Lightning Ridge, New South Wales. One of these, the fossil jaw fragment of Dharragarra, is the oldest known platypus-like fossil. The durophagous Kollikodon, the pseudotribosphenic Steropodon, and Stirtodon, Dharragarra, Opalios, and Parvopalus occur in the same Cenomanian deposits. Oligo-Miocene fossils of the toothed platypus Obdurodon have also been recovered from Australia, and fossils of a 63 million-year old platypus relative occur in southern Argentina (Monotrematum), see fossil monotremes below. The extant platypus genus Ornithorhynchus in also known from Pliocene deposits, and the oldest fossil tachyglossids are Pleistocene (1.7 Ma) in age.
Fossil species
Excepting Ornithorhynchus anatinus, all the animals listed in this section are known only from fossils. Some family designations are hesitant, given the fragmentary nature of the specimens.

Family †Kollikodontidae
Genus †Kollikodon
Species †Kollikodon ritchiei
Genus †Kryoryctes
Species †Kryoryctes cadburyi
Genus †Sundrius
Species †Sundrius ziegleri
Family †Steropodontidae
Genus †Parvopalus
Species †Parvopalus clytiei
Genus †Steropodon
Species †Steropodon galmani
Family †Teinolophidae
Genus †Stirtodon
Species †Stirtodon elizabethae
Genus †Teinolophos
Species †Teinolophos trusleri – 123 Ma, oldest monotreme specimen
Superfamily Ornithorhynchoidea
Family †Opalionidae
Genus †Opalios
Species †Opalios splendens
Family Ornithorhynchidae
Genus †Dharragarra
Species †Dharragarra aurora
Genus †Monotrematum
Species †Monotrematum sudamericanum – 61 Ma, southern South America
Genus Ornithorhynchus – oldest Ornithorhynchus specimen 9 Ma
Species Ornithorhynchus anatinus (platypus) – oldest specimen 10,000 years old
Genus †Obdurodon – includes a number of Miocene (24–5 Ma) Riversleigh platypuses
Species †Obdurodon dicksoni
Species †Obdurodon insignis
Species †Obdurodon tharalkooschild – Middle Miocene and Upper Miocene (15–5 Ma)
Genus †Patagorhynchus
Species †Patagorhynchus pascuali - Maastrichtian, earliest known South American monotreme
Family Tachyglossidae
Genus Zaglossus – Upper Pleistocene (1.8–0.1 Ma)
Species†Zaglossus robustus
Genus †Murrayglossus
Species †Murrayglossus hacketti
Genus †Megalibgwilia
Species †Megalibgwilia ramsayi – Late Pleistocene
Species †Megalibgwilia robusta – Miocene


The evolution of mammals has passed through many stages since the first appearance of their synapsid ancestors in the Pennsylvanian sub-period of the late Carboniferous period. By the mid-Triassic, there were many synapsid species that looked like mammals. The lineage leading to today's mammals split up in the Jurassic; synapsids from this period include Dryolestes, more closely related to extant placentals and marsupials than to monotremes, as well as Ambondro, more closely related to monotremes. Later on, the eutherian and metatherian lineages separated; the metatherians are the animals more closely related to the marsupials, while the eutherians are those more closely related to the placentals. Since Juramaia, the earliest known eutherian, lived 160 million years ago in the Jurassic, this divergence must have occurred in the same period.
After the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event wiped out the non-avian dinosaurs (birds being the only surviving dinosaurs) and several mammalian groups, placental and marsupial mammals diversified into many new forms and ecological niches throughout the Paleogene and Neogene, by the end of which all modern orders had appeared.
The synapsid lineage became distinct from the sauropsid lineage in the late Carboniferous period, between 320 and 315 million years ago. The only living synapsids are mammals,  while the sauropsids gave rise to today's reptiles; to the dinosaurs, hence in turn to birds; and to all the extinct amniotes more closely related to them than to mammals. Primitive synapsids were traditionally called "mammal-like reptiles" or "pelycosaurs", but both are now seen as outdated and disfavored paraphyletic terms, since they were not reptiles, nor part of reptile lineage. The modern term for these is "stem mammals", and sometimes "protomammals" or "paramammals".
Throughout the Permian period, the synapsids included the dominant carnivores and several important herbivores. In the subsequent Triassic period, however, a previously obscure group of sauropsids, the archosaurs, became the dominant vertebrates. The mammaliaforms appeared during this period; their superior sense of smell, backed up by a large brain, facilitated entry into nocturnal niches with less exposure to archosaur predation. (Conversely, mammaliaforms' success in these niches may have prevented archosaurs from becoming smaller or nocturnal themselves.) The nocturnal lifestyle may have contributed greatly to the development of mammalian traits such as endothermy and hair. Later in the Mesozoic, after theropod dinosaurs replaced rauisuchians as the dominant carnivores, mammals spread into other ecological niches. For example, Castorocauda became aquatic, Volaticotherium were gliders, and Repenomamus even fed on juvenile dinosaurs.
Most of the evidence consists of fossils. For many years, fossils of Mesozoic mammals and their immediate ancestors were scarce and fragmentary. However, since the mid-1990s, numerous significant discoveries particularly in China have greatly expanded knowledge in this area. The relatively new techniques of molecular phylogenetics have also shed light on some aspects of mammalian evolution by estimating the timing of important divergence points for modern species. When used carefully, these techniques often, but not always, agree with the fossil record.
Although mammary glands are a signature feature of modern mammals, little is known about the evolution of lactation as these soft tissues are not often preserved in the fossil record. Most research on mammalian evolution focuses on tooth morphology, as teeth are among the most durable parts of the tetrapod skeleton. Other important research characteristics include the evolution of the middle ear bones, erect limb posture, a bony secondary palate, fur, hair, and endothermy.
Definition of "mammal"
While living mammal species can be identified by the presence of milk-producing mammary glands in the females, other features are required in classifying fossils, because mammary glands and other soft-tissue features are not visible in fossils.
One such feature available for paleontology, shared by all living mammals (including monotremes), but not present in any of the early Triassic therapsids, is shown in Figure 1 (on the right), namely: mammals use two bones for hearing that all other amniotes use for eating. The earliest amniotes had a jaw joint composed of the articular (a small bone at the back of the lower jaw) and the quadrate (a small bone at the back of the upper jaw). All non-mammalian tetrapods use this system including amphibians, turtles, lizards, snakes, crocodilians, dinosaurs (including the birds), ichthyosaurs, pterosaurs and therapsids. But mammals have a different jaw joint, composed only of the dentary (the lower jaw bone, which carries the teeth) and the squamosal (another small skull bone). In the Jurassic, their quadrate and articular bones evolved into the incus and malleus bones in the middle ear. Mammals also have a double occipital condyle: they have two knobs at the base of the skull that fit into the topmost neck vertebra, while other tetrapods have a single occipital condyle.
In a 1981 article, Kenneth A. Kermack and his co-authors argued for drawing the line between mammals and earlier synapsids at the point where the mammalian pattern of molar occlusion was being acquired and the dentary-squamosal joint had appeared. The criterion chosen, they noted, is merely a matter of convenience; their choice was based on the fact that "the lower jaw is the most likely skeletal element of a Mesozoic mammal to be preserved." Today, most paleontologists consider that animals are mammals if they satisfy this criterion.
Ancestry of mammalsAmniotes
The first fully terrestrial vertebrates were reptilian amniotes — their eggs had internal membranes that allowed the developing embryo to breathe but kept water in. This allowed amniotes to lay eggs on dry land, while amphibians generally need to lay their eggs in water (a few amphibians, such as the common Suriname toad, have evolved other ways of getting around this limitation). The first amniotes apparently arose in the middle Carboniferous from the ancestral reptiliomorphs.
Within a few million years, two important amniote lineages became distinct: synapsids, from which mammals are descended, and sauropsids, from which lizards, snakes, turtles/tortoises, crocodilians, dinosaurs, and birds are descended. The earliest known fossils of synapsids and sauropsids (such as Archaeothyris and Hylonomus, respectively) date from about 320 to 315 million years ago. The times of origin are difficult to know, because vertebrate fossils from the late Carboniferous are very rare, and therefore the actual first occurrences of each of these types of animal might have been considerably earlier than the first fossil.
Synapsids
Synapsid skulls are identified by the distinctive pattern of the holes behind each eye, which offered the following advantages:

made the skull lighter without sacrificing strength.
saved energy by using less bone.
probably provided attachment points for jaw muscles. Having attachment points further away from the jaw made it possible for the muscles to be longer and therefore to exert a strong pull over a wide range of jaw movement without being stretched or contracted beyond their optimum range.
A number of creatures often – and incorrectly – believed to be dinosaurs, hence part of the reptile lineage and sauropsids, were in fact synapsids. This includes the well-known Dimetrodon.
Terms used for discussing non-mammalian synapsids
When referring to the ancestors and close relatives of mammals, paleontologists also use the following terms of convenience:

Pelycosaurs — all synapsids, and all of their descendants, except for therapsids – the eventual ancestor of mammals. The pelycosaurs included the largest land vertebrates of the Early Permian, such as the 6 metre (20 foot)-long Cotylorhynchus hancocki. Among the other large pelycosaurs were Dimetrodon grandis and Edaphosaurus cruciger.
Stem mammals (sometimes called protomammals or paramammals, and previously called mammal-like reptiles) — all synapsids, and all of their descendants, except for mammals themselves. Stem mammals therefore include all pelycosaurs, and also all non-mammalian therapsids. Traditionally these were known as "mammal-like reptiles", but this is incorrect; terms such as "stem mammal" are preferred instead, because these synapsids were neither reptiles nor even part of reptile lineage.
Therapsids
Therapsids descended from  sphenacodonts, a group of primitive synapsids, in the middle Permian, and took over from them as the dominant land vertebrates. They differ from earlier synapsids in several features of the skull and jaws, including larger temporal fenestrae and incisors that are equal in size.
The therapsid lineage then went through several stages, leading to the evolution of cynodonts in the late Permian, some of which had begun to resemble early mammals:

gradual development of a bony secondary palate. Most books and articles interpret this as a prerequisite for the evolution of mammals' high metabolic rate, because it enabled these animals to eat and breathe at the same time. But some scientists point out that some modern ectotherms use a fleshy secondary palate to separate the mouth from the airway, and that a bony palate provides a surface on which the tongue can manipulate food, facilitating chewing rather than breathing. The interpretation of the bony secondary palate as an adaptation for chewing also implies the evolution of a faster metabolism, as chewing reduces food particle size, thereby accelerating digestion. In mammals, the palate is formed by two specific bones; however, various Permian therapsids possessed different combinations of bones positioned to serve a similar function.
the dentary gradually becomes the main bone of the lower jaw.
Therapsid family tree
A simplified phylogenetic tree showing only what is most relevant to the evolution of mammals is shown below:

Only the dicynodonts, therocephalians, and cynodonts survived into the Triassic.
Biarmosuchia
The Biarmosuchia were the most primitive and pelycosaur-like of the therapsids.
Dinocephalians
Dinocephalians ("terrible heads") included both carnivores and herbivores. They were large; Anteosaurus was up to 20 ft (6.1 m) long. Some of the carnivores had semi-erect hindlimbs, but all dinocephalians had sprawling forelimbs. In many ways they were very primitive therapsids; for example, they had no secondary palate and their jaws were rather "reptilian".
Anomodonts
The anomodonts ("anomalous teeth") were among the most successful of the herbivorous therapsids — one sub-group, the dicynodonts, survived to the end of the Triassic. But dicynodonts were very different from modern herbivorous mammals, as their only teeth were a pair of fangs in the upper jaw (lost in some derived kannemeyeriiformes) and it is generally agreed that they had beaks like those of birds or ceratopsians.
Theriodonts
The theriodonts ("beast teeth") and their descendants had jaw joints in which the articular bone of the lower jaw tightly gripped the very small quadrate bone of the skull. This allowed a much wider gape and allowed one group, the carnivorous gorgonopsians ("gorgon faces"), to develop "sabre teeth". However, the jaw hinge of the theriodont had a longer term significance — the much reduced size of the quadrate bone was an important step in the development of the mammalian jaw joint and middle ear.
The gorgonopsians still had some primitive features: no bony secondary palate (other bones in the right places perform the same functions); sprawling forelimbs; hindlimbs that could operate in both sprawling and erect postures. The therocephalians ("beast heads"), which appear to have arisen at about the same time as the gorgonopsians, had additional mammal-like features, e.g. their finger and toe bones had the same number of phalanges (segments) as in early mammals (and the same number that primates have, including humans). Numerous Changhsingian coprolites that possibly belong to therocephalians and indeterminate basal archosaurs (proterosuchids) contain elongated hollow structures that could be remains of hair. That means therapsids were covered in hair as early as 252 million years ago.
Cynodonts
The cynodonts, a theriodont group that also arose in the late Permian, include the ancestors of all mammals. Cynodonts' mammal-like features include further reduction in the number of bones in the lower jaw, a secondary bony palate, cheek teeth with a complex pattern in the crowns, and a brain which filled the endocranial cavity.
Multi-chambered burrows have been found, containing as many as 20 skeletons of the Early Triassic cynodont Trirachodon; the animals are thought to have been drowned by a flash flood. The extensive shared burrows indicate that these animals were capable of complex social behaviors.
Their primitive synapsid and therapsid ancestors were very large (between 5–8 ft (1.5–2.4 m)) but cynodonts gradually decreased in size (to 1.5–5 ft (0.46–1.52 m)) even before the Permian-Triassic extinction event, probably due to competition with other therapsids. After the extinction event, the probainognathian cynodont group rapidly decreased in size (to 4–18 in (100–460 mm)) due to new competition with archosaurs and  transitioned to nocturnality, evolving nocturnal features, pulmonary alveoli, bronchioles and a developed diaphragm for a larger surface area for breathing, enucleated erythrocytes, a large intestine which bears a true colon after the cecum, endothermy, a hairy, glandular and thermoregulatory skin (which releases sebum and sweat), and a 4-chambered heart to maintain their high metabolism, larger brains, and fully upright hindlimb (forelimbs remained semi sprawling, and became like that only later, in therians). Some skin glands may have evolved into mammary glands in females for fulfilling the metabolic demands of their offspring (which increased 10 times). Many skeletal changes occurred also: the dentary bone became stronger and held differentiated teeth, for example, and the pair of nasal openings in the skull became fused.
These evolutionary changes led to the first mammals (size around 4 in (100 mm)). They appear to have evolved rapid growth and short lifespan, a life history trait also found in numerous modern small-bodied mammals. They also adapted to a burrowing lifestyle, losing their large tail-based leg muscles which allowed dinosaurs to become bipedal, which may explain why bipedal mammals are so rare.
Triassic takeover
The catastrophic mass extinction at the end of the Permian, around 252 million years ago, killed off about 70% of terrestrial vertebrate species and the majority of land plants.
As a result, ecosystems and food chains collapsed, and the establishment of new stable ecosystems took about 30 million years. With the disappearance of the gorgonopsians, which were dominant predators in the late Permian, the cynodonts' principal competitors for dominance of the carnivorous niches were a previously obscure sauropsid group, the archosaurs, which includes the ancestors of crocodilians and dinosaurs.
The archosaurs quickly became the dominant carnivores, a development often called the "Triassic takeover". Their success may have been due to the fact that the early Triassic was predominantly arid and therefore archosaurs' superior water conservation gave them a decisive advantage. All known archosaurs have glandless skins and eliminate nitrogenous waste in a uric acid paste containing little water, while the cynodonts probably excreted most such waste in a solution of urea, as mammals do today; considerable water is required to keep urea dissolved.
However, this theory has been questioned, since it implies synapsids were necessarily less advantaged in water retention, that synapsid decline coincides with climate changes or archosaur diversity (neither of which has been tested) and the fact that desert-dwelling mammals are as well adapted in this department as archosaurs, and some cynodonts like Trucidocynodon were large-sized predators.
The Triassic takeover was probably a vital factor in the evolution of the mammals. Two groups stemming from the early cynodonts were successful in niches that had minimal competition from the archosaurs: the tritylodonts, which were herbivores, and the mammals, most of which were small nocturnal insectivores (although some, like Sinoconodon, were carnivores that fed on vertebrate prey, while still others were herbivores or omnivores). As a result:

The therapsid trend towards differentiated teeth with precise occlusion accelerated, because of the need to hold captured arthropods and crush their exoskeletons.
As the body length of the mammals' ancestors fell below 4 in (100 mm), advances in thermal insulation and temperature regulation would have become necessary for nocturnal life.
Acute senses of hearing and smell became vital.
This accelerated the development of the mammalian middle ear (though the complete detachment of the middle ear bones from the jaw happened independently in monotremes).
The increase in the size of the olfactory lobes of the brain increased brain weight as a percentage of total body weight. Brain tissue requires a disproportionate amount of energy. The need for more food to support the enlarged brains increased the pressures for improvements in insulation, temperature regulation and feeding.
Probably as a side-effect of the nocturnal life, mammals lost two of the four cone opsins, photoreceptors in the retina, present in the eyes of the earliest amniotes. Paradoxically, this might have improved their ability to discriminate colors in dim light.
This retreat to a nocturnal role is called a nocturnal bottleneck, and is thought to explain many of the features of mammals.
From cynodonts to crown mammalsFossil record
Mesozoic synapsids that had evolved to the point of having a jaw joint composed of the dentary and squamosal bones are preserved in few good fossils, mainly because they were mostly smaller than rats:

They were largely restricted to environments that are less likely to provide good fossils. Floodplains as the best terrestrial environments for fossilization provide few mammal fossils, because they are dominated by medium to large animals, and the mammals could not compete with archosaurs in the medium to large size range.
Their delicate bones were vulnerable to being destroyed before they could be fossilized — by scavengers (including fungi and bacteria) and by being trodden on.
Small fossils are harder to spot and more vulnerable to being destroyed by weathering and other natural stresses before they are discovered.
Over the past 50 years, the number of known Mesozoic mammal fossils has increased significantly. For example, only 116 genera were identified by 1979, compared to approximately 310 by 2007. This expansion has also been accompanied by improved fossil quality, with at least 18 Mesozoic mammals now represented by nearly complete skeletons.
Mammals or mammaliaforms
Some writers restrict the term "mammal" to the crown group mammals, the group consisting of the most recent common ancestor of the monotremes, marsupials, and placentals, together with all the descendants of that ancestor. In an influential 1988 paper, Timothy Rowe advocated this restriction, arguing that "ancestry... provides the only means of properly defining taxa" and, in particular, that the divergence of the monotremes from the animals more closely related to marsupials and placentals "is of central interest to any study of Mammalia as a whole." To accommodate some related taxa falling outside the crown group, he defined the Mammaliaformes as comprising "the last common ancestor of Morganucodontidae and Mammalia [as he had defined the latter term] and all its descendants." Besides Morganucodontidae, the newly defined taxon includes Docodonta and Kuehneotheriidae. Though haramiyids have been referred to the mammals since the 1860s, Rowe excluded them from the Mammaliaformes as falling outside his definition, putting them in a larger clade, the Mammaliamorpha.
Some writers have adopted this terminology noting, to avoid misunderstanding, that they have done so. Most paleontologists, however, still think that animals with the dentary-squamosal jaw joint and the sort of molars characteristic of modern mammals should formally be members of Mammalia.
Where the ambiguity in the term "mammal" may be confusing, this article uses "mammaliaform" and "crown mammal".
Family tree – cynodonts to crown group mammals
(based on Cynodontia:Dendrogram – Palaeos)
Morganucodontidae
The Morganucodontidae first appeared in the late Triassic, about 205 million years ago. They are an excellent example of transitional fossils, since they have both the dentary-squamosal and articular-quadrate jaw joints. They were also one of the first discovered and most thoroughly studied of the mammaliaforms outside of the crown-group mammals, since an unusually large number of morganucodont fossils have been found.
Docodonts
Docodonts, among the most common Jurassic mammaliaforms, are noted for the sophistication of their molars. They are thought to have had general semi-aquatic tendencies, with the fish-eating Castorocauda ("beaver tail"), which lived in the mid-Jurassic about 164M years ago and was first discovered in 2004 and described in 2006, being the most well-understood example. Castorocauda was not a crown group mammal, but it is extremely important in the study of the evolution of mammals because the first find was an almost complete skeleton (a luxury in paleontology) and it breaks the "small nocturnal insectivore" stereotype:

It was noticeably larger than most Mesozoic mammaliaform fossils — about 17 in (430 mm) from its nose to the tip of its 5 in (130 mm) tail, and may have weighed 500–800 g (18–28 oz).
It provides the earliest absolutely certain evidence of hair and fur. Previously the earliest was Eomaia, a crown group mammal from about 125M years ago.
It had aquatic adaptations including flattened tail bones and remnants of soft tissue between the toes of the back feet, suggesting that they were webbed. Previously the earliest known semi-aquatic mammaliaforms were from the Eocene, about 110M years later.
Castorocauda's powerful forelimbs look adapted for digging. This feature and the spurs on its ankles make it resemble the platypus, which also swims and digs.
Its teeth look adapted for eating fish: the first two molars had cusps in a straight row, which made them more suitable for gripping and slicing than for grinding; and these molars are curved backwards, to help in grasping slippery prey.
Hadrocodium
The family tree above shows Hadrocodium as a close relative of crown-group mammals. This mammaliaform, dated about 195 million years ago in the very early Jurassic, exhibits some important features:

The jaw joint consists only of the squamosal and dentary bones, and the jaw contains no smaller bones to the rear of the dentary, unlike the therapsid design.
In therapsids and early mammaliaforms, the eardrum may have stretched over a trough at the rear of the lower jaw. But Hadrocodium had no such trough, which suggests its ear was part of the cranium, as it is in crown-group mammals — and hence that the former articular and quadrate had migrated to the middle ear and become the malleus and incus. On the other hand, the dentary has a "bay" at the rear that mammals lack. This suggests that Hadrocodium's dentary bone retained the same shape that it would have had if the articular and quadrate had remained part of the jaw joint, and therefore that Hadrocodium or a very close ancestor may have been the first to have a fully mammalian middle ear.
Therapsids and earlier mammaliaforms had their jaw joints very far back in the skull, partly because the ear was at the rear end of the jaw but also had to be close to the brain. This arrangement limited the size of the braincase, because it forced the jaw muscles to run round and over it. Hadrocodium's braincase and jaws were no longer bound to each other by the need to support the ear, and its jaw joint was further forward. In its descendants or those of animals with a similar arrangement, the brain case was free to expand without being constrained by the jaw and the jaw was free to change without being constrained by the need to keep the ear near the brain — in other words it now became possible for mammaliaforms both to develop large brains and to adapt their jaws and teeth in ways that were purely specialized for eating.
Kuehneotheriidae
The family Kuehneotheriidae, known from the Late Triassic and Early Jurassic, was originally classified as part of either 'Symmetrodonta' or 'Pantotheria' based on their tooth structure, with Kuehneotherium once being considered the oldest known representative of Theria. They have since been recovered as among the closest relatives of crown-group mammals. As only tooth fossils have been discovered, they nevertheless remain poorly known, and have rarely been included in phylogenetic studies.
Earliest crown mammals
The crown group mammals, sometimes called 'true mammals', are the extant mammals and their close relatives back to their last common ancestor. Since this group has living members, DNA analysis can be applied in an attempt to explain the evolution of features that do not appear in fossils. This endeavor often involves molecular phylogenetics, a technique that has become popular since the mid-1980s.
Family tree of early crown mammals
Cladogram after Z.-X Luo († marks extinct groups) and Hackländer.
Color vision
Early amniotes had four opsins in the cones of their retinas to use for distinguishing colours: one sensitive to red, one to green, and two corresponding to different shades of blue. The green opsin was not inherited by any crown mammals, but all normal individuals did inherit the red one. Early crown mammals thus had three cone opsins, the red one and both of the blues. All their extant descendants have lost one of the blue-sensitive opsins but not always the same one: monotremes retain one blue-sensitive opsin, while marsupials and placentals retain the other (except cetaceans, which later lost the other blue opsin as well). Some placentals and marsupials, including higher primates, subsequently evolved green-sensitive opsins; like early crown mammals, therefore, their vision is trichromatic.
Australosphenida and Ausktribosphenidae
Ausktribosphenidae is a group name that has been given to some rather puzzling finds that:

appear to have tribosphenic molars, a type of tooth that is otherwise known only in placentals and marsupials.
come from mid-Cretaceous deposits in Australia — but Australia was connected only to Antarctica, and placentals originated in the Northern Hemisphere and were confined to it until continental drift formed land connections from North America to South America, from Asia to Africa and from Asia to India.
are represented only by teeth and jaw fragments, which is not very helpful.
Australosphenida is a group that has been defined in order to include the Ausktribosphenidae and monotremes. Asfaltomylos (mid- to late Jurassic, from Patagonia) has been interpreted as a basal australosphenid (animal that has features shared with both Ausktribosphenidae and monotremes; lacks features that are peculiar to Ausktribosphenidae or monotremes; also lacks features that are absent in Ausktribosphenidae and monotremes) and as showing that australosphenids were widespread throughout Gondwanaland (the old Southern Hemisphere super-continent).
Recent analysis of Teinolophos, which lived somewhere between 121 and 112.5 million years ago, suggests that it was a "crown group" (advanced and relatively specialised) monotreme. This was taken as evidence that the basal (most primitive) monotremes must have appeared considerably earlier, but this has been disputed (see the following section). The study also indicated that some alleged Australosphenids were also "crown group" monotremes (e.g. Steropodon) and that other alleged Australosphenids (e.g. Ausktribosphenos, Bishops, Ambondro, Asfaltomylos) are more closely related to and possibly members of the Therian mammals (group that includes marsupials and placentals, see below).
Monotremes
Teinolophos, from Australia, is the earliest known monotreme. A 2007 study (published 2008) suggests that it was not a basal (primitive, ancestral) monotreme but a full-fledged platypus, and therefore that the platypus and echidna lineages diverged considerably earlier. A more recent study (2009), however, has suggested that, while Teinolophos was a type of platypus, it was also a basal monotreme and predated the radiation of modern monotremes. The semi-aquatic lifestyle of platypuses prevented them from being outcompeted by the marsupials that migrated to Australia millions of years ago, since joeys need to remain attached to their mothers and would drown if their mothers ventured into water (though there are exceptions like the water opossum and the lutrine opossum; however, they both live in South America and thus do not come into contact with monotremes). Genetic evidence has determined that echidnas diverged from the platypus lineage as recently as 19-48M, when they made their transition from semi-aquatic to terrestrial lifestyle.
Monotremes have some features that may be inherited from the cynodont ancestors:

like lizards and birds, they use the same orifice to urinate, defecate and reproduce ("monotreme" means "one hole").
they lay eggs that are leathery and uncalcified, like those of lizards, turtles and crocodilians.
Unlike other mammals, female monotremes do not have nipples but feed their young by "sweating" milk from patches on their bellies.
These features are not visible in fossils, and the main characteristics from paleontologists' point of view are:

a slender dentary bone in which the coronoid process is small or non-existent.
the external opening of the ear lies at the posterior base of the jaw.
the jugal bone is small or non-existent.
a primitive pectoral girdle with strong ventral elements: coracoids, clavicles and interclavicle. Note: therian mammals have no interclavicle.
sprawling or semi-sprawling forelimbs.
Multituberculates
Multituberculates (named for the multiple tubercles on their "molars") are often called the "rodents of the Mesozoic", but this is an example of convergent evolution rather than meaning that they are closely related to the Rodentia. They existed for approximately 120 million years—the longest fossil history of any mammal lineage—but were eventually outcompeted by rodents, becoming extinct during the early Oligocene.
Some authors have challenged the phylogeny represented by the cladogram above. They exclude the multituberculates from the mammalian crown group, holding that multituberculates are more distantly related to extant mammals than even the Morganucodontidae. Multituberculates are like undisputed crown mammals in that their jaw joints consist of only the dentary and squamosal bones-whereas the quadrate and articular bones are part of the middle ear; their teeth are differentiated, occlude, and have mammal-like cusps; they have a zygomatic arch; and the structure of the pelvis suggests that they gave birth to tiny helpless young, like modern marsupials. On the other hand, they differ from modern mammals:

Their "molars" have two parallel rows of tubercles, unlike the tribosphenic (three-peaked) molars of uncontested early crown mammals.
The chewing action differs in that undisputed crown mammals chew with a side-to-side grinding action, which means that the molars usually occlude on only one side at a time, while multituberculates' jaws were incapable of side-to-side movement—they chewed, rather, by dragging the lower teeth backwards against the upper ones as the jaw closed.
The anterior (forward) part of the zygomatic arch mostly consists of the maxilla (upper jawbone) rather than the jugal, a small bone in a little slot in the maxillary process (extension).
The squamosal does not form part of the braincase.
The rostrum (snout) is unlike that of undisputed crown mammals; in fact it looks more like that of a pelycosaur, such as Dimetrodon. The multituberculate rostrum is box-like, with the large flat maxillae forming the sides, the nasal the top, and the tall premaxilla at the front.
Theria
Theria ("beasts") is the clade originating with the last common ancestor of the Eutheria (including placentals) and Metatheria (including marsupials). Common features include:

no interclavicle.
coracoid bones non-existent or fused with the shoulder blades to form coracoid processes.
a type of crurotarsal ankle joint in which: the main joint is between the tibia and astragalus; the calcaneum has no contact with the tibia but forms a heel to which muscles can attach. (The other well-known type of crurotarsal ankle is seen in crocodilians and works differently — most of the bending at the ankle is between the calcaneum and astragalus).
tribosphenic molars.
Metatheria
The living Metatheria are all marsupials (animals with pouches). A few fossil genera, such as the Mongolian late Cretaceous Asiatherium, may be marsupials or members of some other metatherian group(s).
The oldest known metatherian is Sinodelphys, found in 125M-year-old early Cretaceous shale in China's northeastern Liaoning Province. The fossil is nearly complete and includes tufts of fur and imprints of soft tissues.
Didelphimorphia (common opossums of the Western Hemisphere) first appeared in the late Cretaceous and still have living representatives, probably because they are mostly semi-arboreal unspecialized omnivores.
Tracks from the Early Cretaceous of Angola show the existence of raccoon-size mammals 118 million years ago.
The best-known feature of marsupials is their method of reproduction:

The mother develops a kind of yolk sack in her womb that delivers nutrients to the embryo. Embryos of bandicoots, koalas and wombats additionally form placenta-like organs that connect them to the uterine wall, although the placenta-like organs are smaller than in placental mammals and it is not certain that they transfer nutrients from the mother to the embryo.
Pregnancy is very short, typically four to five weeks. The embryo is born at a very early stage of development, and is usually less than 2 in (51 mm) long at birth. It has been suggested that the short pregnancy is necessary to reduce the risk that the mother's immune system will attack the embryo.
The newborn marsupial uses its forelimbs (with relatively strong hands) to climb to a nipple, which is usually in a pouch on the mother's belly. The mother feeds the baby by contracting muscles over her mammary glands, as the baby is too weak to suck. The newborn marsupial's need to use its forelimbs in climbing to the nipple was historically thought to have restricted metatherian evolution, as it was assumed that the forelimb could not become specialised intro structures like wings, hooves or flippers. However, several bandicoots, most notably the pig-footed bandicoot, have true hooves similar to those of placental ungulates, and several marsupial gliders have evolved.

Although some marsupials look very like some placentals (the thylacine, "marsupial tiger" or "marsupial wolf" is a good example), marsupial skeletons have some features that distinguish them from placentals:

Some, including the thylacine, have four molars; whereas no known placental has more than three.
All have a pair of palatal fenestrae, window-like openings on the bottom of the skull (in addition to the smaller nostril openings).
Marsupials also have a pair of marsupial bones (sometimes called "epipubic bones"), which support the pouch in females. But these are not unique to marsupials, since they have been found in fossils of multituberculates, monotremes, and even eutherians — so they are probably a common ancestral feature that disappeared at some point after the ancestry of living placental mammals diverged from that of marsupials.
Some researchers think the epipubic bones' original function was to assist locomotion by supporting some of the muscles that pull the thigh forwards.
Eutheria
The time of appearance of the earliest eutherians has been a matter of controversy. On one hand, recently discovered fossils of Juramaia have been dated to 160 million years ago and classified as eutherian. Fossils of Eomaia from 125 million years ago in the Early Cretaceous have also been classified as eutherian. A recent analysis of phenomic characters, however, classified Eomaia as pre-eutherian and reported that the earliest clearly eutherian specimens came from Maelestes, dated to 91 million years ago. That study also reported that eutherians did not significantly diversify until after the catastrophic extinction at the Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary, about 66 million years ago.
Eomaia was found to have some features that are more like those of marsupials and earlier metatherians:

Epipubic bones extending forwards from the pelvis, which are not found in any modern placental, but are found in all other mammals — early mammaliaforms, non-placental eutherians, marsupials, and monotremes — as well as in the cynodont therapsids that are closest to mammals. Their function is to stiffen the body during locomotion. This stiffening would be harmful in pregnant placentals, whose abdomens need to expand.
A narrow pelvic outlet, which indicates that the young were very small at birth and therefore pregnancy was short, as in modern marsupials. This suggests that the placenta was a later development.
Five incisors in each side of the upper jaw. This number is typical of metatherians, and the maximum number in modern placentals is three, except for homodonts, such as the armadillo. But Eomaia's molar to premolar ratio (it has more pre-molars than molars) is typical of eutherians, including placentals, and not normal in marsupials.
Eomaia also has a Meckelian groove, a primitive feature of the lower jaw that is not found in modern placental mammals.
These intermediate features are consistent with molecular phylogenetics estimates that the placentals diversified about 110M years ago, 15M years after the date of the Eomaia fossil.
Eomaia also has many features that strongly suggest it was a climber, including several features of the feet and toes; well-developed attachment points for muscles that are used a lot in climbing; and a tail that is twice as long as the rest of the spine.
Placentals' best-known feature is their method of reproduction:

The embryo attaches itself to the uterus via a large placenta via which the mother supplies food and oxygen and removes waste products.
Pregnancy is relatively long and the young are fairly well developed at birth. In some species (especially herbivores living on plains) the young can walk and even run within an hour of birth.
It has been suggested that the evolution of placental reproduction was made possible by retroviruses that:

make the interface between the placenta and uterus into a syncytium, i.e. a thin layer of cells with a shared external membrane. This allows the passage of oxygen, nutrients and waste products, but prevents the passage of blood and other cells that would cause the mother's immune system to attack the fetus.
reduce the aggressiveness of the mother's immune system, which is good for the foetus but makes the mother more vulnerable to infections.
From a paleontologist's point of view, eutherians are mainly distinguished by various features of their teeth, ankles and feet.
Expansion of ecological niches in the Mesozoic
Generally speaking, most species of mammaliaforms did occupy the niche of small, nocturnal insectivores, but recent finds, mainly in China, show that some species and especially crown group mammals were larger and that there was a larger variety of lifestyles than previously thought. For example:

The therian Patagomaia, found in the Late Cretaceous Chorrillo Formation (Argentina) is the largest known Mesozoic mammal, weighing an estimated 14 kilograms (31 lb).
Adalatherium hui is a large sized, erect limbed herbivore from the Cretaceous of Madagascar.
Castorocauda, a member of Docodonta which lived in the middle Jurassic about 164 million years ago, was about 42.5 cm (16.7 in) long, weighed 500–800 g (18–28 oz), had a beaver-like tail and limbs adapted for swimming and digging, and teeth adapted for eating fish. Another docodont, Haldanodon, also had semi-aquatic habits, and indeed aquatic tendencies were probably common among docodonts based on their prevalence in wetland environments. The eutriconodonts Liaoconodon and Yanoconodon have more recently also have been suggested to be freshwater swimmers, lacking Castorocauda's powerful tail but possessing paddle-like limbs; the eutriconodont Astroconodon has similarly been suggested as being semi-aquatic in the past, albeit to less convincing evidence.
Multituberculates are allotherians that survived for over 125 million years (from mid-Jurassic, about 160M years ago, to late Eocene, about 35M years ago) are often called the "rodents of the Mesozoic". As noted above, they may have given birth to tiny live neonates rather than laying eggs.
Fruitafossor, from the late Jurassic period about 150 million years ago, was about the size of a chipmunk and its teeth, forelimbs and back suggest that it broke open the nest of social insects to prey on them (probably termites, as ants had not yet appeared).
Similarly, the gobiconodontid Spinolestes possessed adaptations for fossoriality and convergent traits with placental xenarthrans like scutes and xenarthrous vertebrae, so it too might have had anteater like habits. It is also notable for the presence of quills akin to those of modern spiny mice.
Volaticotherium, from the boundary the early Cretaceous about 125 million years ago, is the earliest-known gliding mammal and had a gliding membrane that stretched out between its limbs, rather like that of a modern flying squirrel. This also suggests it was active mainly during the day. The closely related Argentoconodon also shows similar adaptations that may also suggest aerial locomotion.
Repenomamus, a eutriconodont from the early Cretaceous 130 million years ago, was a stocky, badger-like predator that sometimes preyed on young dinosaurs. Two species have been recognized, one more than 1 m (3 ft 3 in) long and weighing about 12–14 kg (26–31 lb), the other less than 0.5 m (1 ft 8 in) long and weighing 4–6 kg (8.8–13.2 lb).
Schowalteria is a Late Cretaceous species almost as large if not larger than R. giganticus that shows speciations towards herbivory, comparable to those of modern ungulates.
Zhelestidae is a lineage of Late Cretaceous herbivorous eutherians, to the point of being mistaken for stem-ungulates.
Similarly, mesungulatids are also fairly large sized herbivorous mammals from the Late Cretaceous
Deltatheroidans were metatherians that were specialised towards carnivorous habits, and possible forms like Oxlestes and Khudulestes might have been among the largest Mesozoic mammals, though their status as deltatheroidans is questionable.
Ichthyoconodon, a eutriconodont from the Berriasian of Morocco, is currently known from molariforms found in marine deposits. These teeth are sharp-cusped and similar in shape to those of piscivorous mammals, and unlike the teeth of contemporary mammals they do not show degradation, so rather than being carried down by river deposits the animal died in situ or close. This has been taken to mean that it was a marine mammal, likely one of the few examples known from the Mesozoic.
Didelphodon is a Late Cretaceous riverine species of stagodontid marsupialiform with a durophagous dentition, robust jaws similar to a modern Tasmanian devil, and a postcranial skeleton very similar in size and shape to an otter. This animal has been lauded as the strongest bite of all Mesozoic mammals. It possibly specialized on eating freshwater crabs and molluscs.
Tracks of a raccoon-sized mammaliaform representing the morphofamily Ameghinichnidae are described from the Early Cretaceous (late Aptian) Calonda Formation (Angola) by Mateus et al. (2017), who name a new ichnotaxon Catocapes angolanus.
A gobiconodontid was preserved attacking a substantially larger dinosaur.
A study on Mesozoic mammaliaforms suggests that they were a primary factor in constraining mammalian body size, rather than solely competition from dinosaurs. In general, it appears mammal faunas on southern continents had attained larger body sizes than those of northern continents.
Evolution of major groups of living mammals
There are currently vigorous debates between traditional paleontologists and molecular phylogeneticists about how and when the modern groups of mammals diversified, especially the placentals. Generally, the traditional paleontologists date the appearance of a particular group by the earliest known fossil whose features make it likely to be a member of that group, while the molecular phylogeneticists suggest that each lineage diverged earlier (usually in the Cretaceous) and that the earliest members of each group were anatomically very similar to early members of other groups and differed only in their genetics. These debates extend to the definition of and relationships between the major groups of placentals.
Molecular phylogenetics-based family tree of placental mammals
Molecular phylogenetics uses features of organisms' genes to work out family trees in much the same way as paleontologists do with features of fossils — if two organisms' genes are more similar to each other than to those of a third organism, the two organisms are more closely related to each other than to the third.
Molecular phylogeneticists have proposed a family tree that is both broadly similar to but has notable differences from that of the paleontologists. Like paleontologists, molecular phylogeneticists have differing ideas about various details, but here is a typical family tree according to molecular phylogenetics: Note that the diagram shown here omits extinct groups, as one cannot extract DNA from most fossils. Some finer-level subdivisions are glossed-over.

Here are the most significant of the differences between this family tree and the one familiar to paleontologists:

The top-level division is between Atlantogenata and Boreoeutheria, instead of between Xenarthra and the rest. However, analysis of transposable element insertions supports a three-way top-level split between Xenarthra, Afrotheria and Boreoeutheria and the Atlantogenata clade does not receive significant support in recent distance-based molecular phylogenetics.
Afrotheria contains several groups that are only distantly related according to the paleontologists' version: Afroinsectiphilia ("African insectivores"), Tubulidentata (aardvarks, which paleontologists regard as much closer to odd-toed ungulates than to other members of Afrotheria), Macroscelidea (elephant shrews, usually regarded as close to rabbits and rodents). The only members of Afrotheria that paleontologists would regard as closely related are Hyracoidea (hyraxes), Proboscidea (elephants) and Sirenia (manatees, dugongs).
Members of the defunct order of Insectivores are divided among three clades: One clade is part of Afrotheria, and the other two clades are distinct sub-groups within Boreoeutheria.
Bats are closer to Carnivora and odd-toed ungulates than to Primates and Dermoptera (colugos).
Perissodactyla (odd-toed ungulates) are closer to Carnivora and bats than to Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates).
The grouping together of the Afrotheria has some geological justification: All surviving members of the Afrotheria originate from South American or (mainly) African lineages — even the Indian elephant, which diverged from an African lineage about 7.6 million years ago. As Pangaea broke up, Africa and South America separated from the other continents less than 150M years ago, and from each other between 100M and 80M years ago. So it would not be surprising if the earliest eutherian immigrants into Africa and South America were isolated there and radiated into all the available ecological niches.
Nevertheless, these proposals have been controversial. Paleontologists naturally insist that fossil evidence must take priority over deductions from samples of the DNA of modern animals. More surprisingly, these new family trees have been criticised by other molecular phylogeneticists, sometimes quite harshly:

Mitochondrial DNA's mutation rate in mammals varies from region to region — some parts hardly ever change and some change extremely quickly and even show large variations between individuals within the same species.
Mammalian mitochondrial DNA mutates so fast that it causes a problem called "saturation", where random noise drowns out any information that may be present. If a particular piece of mitochondrial DNA mutates randomly every few million years, it will have changed several times in the 60 to 75M years since the major groups of placental mammals diverged.
Timing of placental evolution
Recent molecular phylogenetic studies suggest that most placental orders diverged late in the Cretaceous period, about 100 to 85 million years ago, but that modern families first appeared later, in the late Eocene and early Miocene epochs of the Cenozoic period. Fossil-based analyses, on the contrary, limit the placentals to the Cenozoic. Many Cretaceous fossil sites contain well-preserved lizards, salamanders, birds, and mammals, but not the modern forms of mammals. It is possible that they simply did not exist, and that the molecular clock runs fast during major evolutionary radiations. On the other hand, there is fossil evidence from 85 million years ago of hoofed mammals that may be ancestors of modern ungulates.
Fossils of the earliest members of most modern groups date from the Paleocene, a few date from later and very few from the Cretaceous, before the extinction of the dinosaurs. But some paleontologists, influenced by molecular phylogenetic studies, have used statistical methods to extrapolate backwards from fossils of members of modern groups and concluded that primates arose in the late Cretaceous. However, statistical studies of the fossil record confirm that mammals were restricted in size and diversity right to the end of the Cretaceous, and rapidly grew in size and diversity during the Early Paleocene.
Evolution of mammalian featuresJaws and middle ears
Hadrocodium, whose fossils date from the early Jurassic, provides the first clear evidence of fully mammalian jaw joints and middle ears, in which the jaw joint is formed by the dentary and squamosal bones while the articular and quadrate move to the middle ear, where they are known as the incus and malleus.
One analysis of the monotreme Teinolophos suggested that this animal had a pre-mammalian jaw joint formed by the angular and quadrate bones and that the definitive mammalian middle ear evolved twice independently, in monotremes and in therian mammals, but this idea has been disputed. In fact, two of the suggestion's authors co-authored a later paper that reinterpreted the same features as evidence that Teinolophos was a full-fledged platypus, which means it would have had a mammalian jaw joint and middle ear.
Lactation
It has been suggested that lactation's original function was to keep eggs moist. Much of the argument is based on monotremes (egg-laying mammals):

While the amniote egg is usually described as able to evolve away from water, most reptile eggs actually need moisture if they are not to dry out.
Monotremes do not have nipples, but secrete milk from a hairy patch on their bellies.
During incubation, monotreme eggs are covered in a sticky substance whose origin is not known. Before the eggs are laid, their shells have only three layers. Afterwards, a fourth layer appears with a composition different from that of the original three. The sticky substance and the fourth layer may be produced by the mammary glands.
If so, that may explain why the patches from which monotremes secrete milk are hairy. It is easier to spread moisture and other substances over the egg from a broad, hairy area than from a small, bare nipple.
Later research demonstrated that caseins already appeared in the common mammalian ancestor approximately 200–310 million years ago. The question of whether secretions of a substance to keep eggs moist translated into actual lactation in therapsids is open. A small mammaliamorph called Sinoconodon, generally assumed to be the sister group of all later mammals, had front teeth in even the smallest individuals. Combined with a poorly ossified jaw, they very probably did not suckle. Thus suckling may have evolved right at the pre-mammal/mammal transition. However, tritylodontids, generally assumed to be more basal, show evidence of suckling. Morganucodontans, also assumed to be basal Mammaliaformes, also show evidence of lactation.
Digestive system
The evolution of the digestive system has formed a significant influence in mammal evolution. With the emergence of mammals, the digestive system was modified in a variety of ways depending on the animal's diet. For example, cats and most carnivores have simple large intestines, while the horse as a herbivore has a voluminous large intestine. An ancestral feature of ruminants is their multi-chambered (usually four-chambered) stomach, which evolved about 50 million years ago. Along with morphology of the gut, gastric acidity has been proposed as a key factor shaping the diversity and composition of microbial communities found in the vertebrate gut. Comparisons of stomach acidity across trophic groups in mammal and bird taxa show that scavengers and carnivores have significantly higher stomach acidities compared to herbivores or carnivores feeding on phylogenetically distant prey such as insects or fish.
Despite the lack of fossilization of the gut, microbial evolution of the gut can be inferred from the interrelationships of existing animals, microbes and probable foodstuffs. Mammals are metagenomic, in that they are composed of not only their own genes, but also those of all of their associated microbes. Gut microbiota has co-diversified as mammalian species have evolved. Recent studies indicate that adaptive divergence between mammalian species is shaped in part by changes in the gut microbiota. The house mouse may have evolved not only with, but also in response to, the unique bacteria inhabiting its gut.
Hair and fur
The first clear evidence of hair or fur is in fossils of Castorocauda and Megaconus, from 164M years ago in the mid-Jurassic. As both mammals Megaconus and Castorocauda have a double coat of hair, with both guard hairs and an undercoat, it may be assumed that their last common ancestor did as well. More recently, the discovery of hair remnants in Permian coprolites pushes back the origin of mammalian hair much further back in the synapsid line to Paleozoic therapsids.
In the mid-1950s, some scientists interpreted the foramina (passages) in the maxillae (upper jaws) and premaxillae (small bones in front of the maxillae) of cynodonts as channels that supplied blood vessels and nerves to vibrissae (whiskers) and suggested that this was evidence of hair or fur. It was soon pointed out, however, that foramina do not necessarily show that an animal had vibrissae; the modern lizard Tupinambis has foramina that are almost identical to those found in the non-mammalian cynodont Thrinaxodon. Popular sources, nevertheless, continue to attribute whiskers to Thrinaxodon. A trace fossil from the Lower Triassic had been erroneously regarded as a cynodont footprint showing hair, but this interpretation has been refuted. A study of cranial openings for facial nerves connected whiskers in extant mammals indicate the Prozostrodontia, small immediate ancestors of mammals, presented whiskers similar to mammals, but that less advanced therapsids would either have immobile whiskers or no whisker at all. Fur may have evolved from whiskers. Whiskers themselves may have evolved as a response to nocturnal and/or burrowing lifestyle.
Ruben & Jones (2000) note that the Harderian glands, which secrete lipids for coating the fur, were present in the earliest mammals like Morganucodon, but were absent in near-mammalian therapsids like Thrinaxodon. The Msx2 gene associated with hair follicle maintenance is also linked to the closure of the parietal eye in mammals, indicating that fur and lack of pineal eye is linked. The pineal eye is present in Thrinaxodon, but absent in more advanced cynognaths (the Probainognathia).
Insulation is the "cheapest" way to maintain a fairly constant body temperature, without consuming energy to produce more body heat. Therefore, the possession of hair or fur would be good evidence of homeothermy, but would not be such strong evidence of a high metabolic rate.
Erect limbs
Understanding of the evolution of erect limbs in mammals is incomplete — living and fossil monotremes have sprawling limbs. Some scientists think that the parasagittal (non-sprawling) limb posture is limited to the Boreosphenida, a group that contains the therians but not, for example, the multituberculates. In particular, they attribute a parasagittal stance to the therians Sinodelphys and Eomaia, which means that the stance had arisen by 125 million years ago, in the Early Cretaceous. However, they also discuss that earlier mammals had more erect forelimbs as opposed to the more sprawling hindlimbs, a trend still continued to some extent in modern placentals and marsupials.
Warm-bloodedness
"Warm-bloodedness" is a complex and rather ambiguous term, because it includes some or all of the following:

Endothermy, the ability to generate heat internally rather than via behaviors such as basking or muscular activity.
Homeothermy, maintaining a fairly constant body temperature. Most enzymes have an optimum operating temperature; efficiency drops rapidly outside the preferred range. A homeothermic organism needs only to possess enzymes that function well in a small range of temperatures.
Tachymetabolism, maintaining a high metabolic rate, particularly when at rest. This requires a fairly high and stable body temperature because of the Q10 effect: biochemical processes run about half as fast if an animal's temperature drops by 10 °C.
Since scientists cannot know much about the internal mechanisms of extinct creatures, most discussion focuses on homeothermy and tachymetabolism. However, it is generally agreed that endothermy first evolved in non-mammalian synapsids such as dicynodonts, which possess body proportions associated with heat retention, high vascularised bones with Haversian canals, and possibly hair. More recently, it has been suggested that endothermy evolved as far back as Ophiacodon.
Modern monotremes have a low body temperature compared to marsupials and placental mammals, around 32 °C (90 °F). Phylogenetic bracketing suggests that the body temperatures of early crown-group mammals were not less than that of extant monotremes. There is cytological evidence that the low metabolism of monotremes is a secondarily evolved trait.
Respiratory turbinates
Modern mammals have respiratory turbinates, convoluted structures of thin bone in the nasal cavity. These are lined with mucous membranes that warm and moisten inhaled air and extract heat and moisture from exhaled air. An animal with respiratory turbinates can maintain a high rate of breathing without the danger of drying its lungs out, and therefore may have a fast metabolism. Unfortunately these bones are very delicate and therefore have not yet been found in fossils. But rudimentary ridges like those that support respiratory turbinates have been found in advanced Triassic cynodonts, such as Thrinaxodon and Diademodon, which suggests that they may have had fairly high metabolic rates.
Bony secondary palate
Mammals have a secondary bony palate, which separates the respiratory passage from the mouth, allowing them to eat and breathe at the same time. Secondary bony palates have been found in the more advanced cynodonts and have been used as evidence of high metabolic rates. But some cold-blooded vertebrates have secondary bony palates (crocodilians and some lizards), while birds, which are warm-blooded, do not.
Diaphragm
A muscular diaphragm helps mammals to breathe, especially during strenuous activity. For a diaphragm to work, the ribs must not restrict the abdomen, so that expansion of the chest can be compensated for by reduction in the volume of the abdomen and vice versa. Diaphragms are known in caseid pelycosaurs, indicating an early origin within synapsids, though they were still fairly inefficient and likely required support from other muscle groups and limb motion.
The advanced cynodonts have very mammal-like rib cages, with greatly reduced lumbar ribs. This suggests that these animals had more developed diaphragms, were capable of strenuous activity for fairly long periods and therefore had high metabolic rates. On the other hand, these mammal-like rib cages may have evolved to increase agility. However, the movement of even advanced therapsids was "like a wheelbarrow", with the hindlimbs providing all the thrust while the forelimbs only steered the animal, in other words advanced therapsids were not as agile as either modern mammals or the early dinosaurs. So the idea that the main function of these mammal-like rib cages was to increase agility is doubtful.
Limb posture
The therapsids had sprawling forelimbs and semi-erect hindlimbs. This suggests that Carrier's constraint would have made it rather difficult for them to move and breathe at the same time, but not as difficult as it is for animals such as lizards, which have completely sprawling limbs. Advanced therapsids may therefore have been significantly less active than modern mammals of similar size and so may have had slower metabolisms overall or else been bradymetabolic (lower metabolism when at rest).
Brain
Mammals are noted for their large brain size relative to body size, compared to other animal groups. Recent findings suggest that the first brain area to expand was that involved in smell. Scientists scanned the skulls of early mammal species dating back to 190–200 million years ago and compared the brain case shapes to earlier pre-mammal species; they found that the brain area involved in the sense of smell was the first to enlarge. This change may have allowed these early mammals to hunt insects at night when dinosaurs were not active.
After the extinction of the dinosaurs 66 million years ago, mammals began to increase in body size as new niches became available, but their brain lagged behind their bodies for the first ten million years. Relative to the body size, the brains of Paleocene mammals were relatively smaller than that of Mesozoic mammals. It was not until the Eocene that the mammalian brains began to catch up with their bodies, particularly in certain areas associated with their senses.
Testicular descent


A military marine mammal is a cetacean or pinniped that has been trained for military uses. Examples include bottlenose dolphins, seals, sea lions, and beluga whales. The United States and Soviet militaries have trained and employed oceanic dolphins for various uses. Military marine mammals have been trained to rescue lost naval swimmers, guard navy ships against enemy divers, locate mines for later clearance by divers, and aid in location and recovery of equipment lost on the seabed.
DolphinsUses of military dolphins
These animals are able to defend ships against enemy divers, locate and retrieve lost or damaged equipment, attach homing devices for torpedoes to larger targets, locate submarines, and much more.
Soviet Union Navy dolphins
The Soviet Navy operated a research facility to explore military uses of marine mammals at Kazachya Bukhta (44.5800°N 33.4023°E﻿ / 44.5800; 33.4023), near Sevastopol. The Russian military's dolphin program is believed to have languished in the early 1990s.
A Soviet military Beluga whale named Tichka twice escaped in 1991 and 1992, crossed the Black Sea and was admired by the residents of the Turkish town Gerze, who called him Aydın.
Russian Federation, Ukraine, and Iran
After the fall of the Soviet Union, the Soviet military dolphin program was passed to the Ukrainian Navy. In March 2000 the BBC reported that the Ukrainian navy had transferred their military dolphin project from Sevastopol to Iran. Iran bought the animals, and the chief trainer carried on his research at Iran's new oceanarium.
In 2012, Ukraine allegedly "resurrected" the military dolphin program. After the 2014 annexation of Crimea, the Ukrainian dolphin program was taken over by Russia. Conflicting statements have been made regarding the fate of the dolphins. One claim is that the program had been demilitarized prior to the annexation, with all military dolphins either sold commercially or dead by natural causes. A counter-claim suggests that dolphins died "patriotically" after going on hunger strikes and resisting their Russian captors. Russia reportedly intended to use advanced technology to visualise the dolphin's biosonar signals in future military dolphin research.
Government public records show that in 2016, five bottlenose dolphins were purchased by the Russian defence ministry from Moscow’s Utrish Dolphinarium.
In 2022 and 2023, there were reports that Russia had deployed dolphins to protect the Sevastopol Naval Base from Ukrainian attacks.
In 2026, the Wall Street Journal reported that Iran may use dolphins carrying mines in attacks on ships in the Strait of Hormuz.
United States Navy dolphins
The U.S. Navy trains dolphins and sea lions under the U.S. Navy Marine Mammal Program, which is based in San Diego, California. The Navy gets some of its dolphins from the Gulf of Mexico.  Military dolphins were used by the U.S. Navy during the First and Second Gulf Wars, and their use dates back to the Vietnam War. About 75 dolphins were in the program circa 2007, and around 70 dolphins and 30 sea lions were reported to be in the program in 2019.
Pioneering the use of dolphins in warfare was the scientist James Fitzgerald whom the CIA sent to Key West, Florida, to set up a classified laboratory in 1964. His assignment was to study whether dolphin hydrodynamics could be applied to the design of submarines, torpedoes and missiles and whether the animals could be trained to perform missions.
The United States Navy implemented a program in 1960 to work with dolphins and sea lions in order to help with defense, mine detection, and the design of new submarines and new underwater weapons. The Navy did many tests with several marine mammals to determine which would be best for the required missions, with "more than 19 species...including some sharks and birds" tested, though the bottlenose dolphin and California sea lion were considered the best at what the Navy needed them for. The bottlenose dolphins' asset was their highly evolved biosonar, helping to find underwater mines, and the sea lions' asset was their impeccable underwater vision, which can help to detect enemy swimmers. In fiscal year 2007, the United States Navy spent $14 million on research on marine mammal training programs for object recovery and mine detection and had 75 trained dolphins.
In 2005, there were press reports that some U.S. military dolphins based on Lake Pontchartrain had escaped during the Hurricane Katrina flooding. The U.S. Navy dismissed these stories as nonsense or a hoax, though they may be taking on the status of an urban myth.
Care of animals
The marine mammals used for the Navy's research and operations are cared for by a full-time staff of veterinarians, veterinarian technicians, and highly trained marine biologists.
Training
The dolphins and sea lions are trained by five teams of the Navy's Marine Mammal fleet members. One team specializes in swimmer detection, three teams in mine location, and another team in object recoveries. The quick-response goal of this fleet is to mobilize a team and be on site within 72 hours.  Dolphins are trained much like police dogs and hunting dogs are. They are given rewards such as fish on correct completion of a task. Dolphins are trained to detect underwater mines and enemy swimmers and then report back to their handlers. Rumours that dolphins had been trained to kill divers have been denied by the US Navy, which claims that training dolphins to fight or kill humans is impossible.
Retired US Admiral Tim Keating claimed that military dolphins could be used to detect mines in the Strait of Hormuz, after Iran threatened to close the waterway in January 2012.
Israel
On January 10, 2022, Hamas, through a report by Al-Quds, suspects Israel of using dolphins for the purpose of targeting Hamas dive fighters. Similar Israel-related animal conspiracy theories were stated in August 2015 when Al-Quds claimed to have sources regarding another incident of a cetacean fighter, equipped with a remote control, a camera, and a weapon that can fire harpoon-type projectiles.
Harm to animals
Ric O'Barry, a former U.S. Navy and civilian trainer of marine mammals, writes that the dolphins complied with their training program only to obtain food. Once they became full, they would no longer be obedient. To prevent this and potential escapes, the navy installed anti-foraging devices that prevented dolphins from fully opening their mouth to feed in the oceans. He also believes that deploying dolphins during war would cause the enemy to attack all dolphins that it comes across, because there is no way to tell a friendly dolphin from a hostile one.
Seals and sea lions
Seals and sea lions are trained and utilised by the US Navy and the Russian Navy. In Russia, dolphins and seals have been trained to carry tools for divers and to detect torpedoes, mines, and other ammunition to working depths of up to 120 metres. Seals are considered better suited than belugas for military use in polar conditions for their "high professionalism" and ability to learn, retain, and understand oral commands.
Belugas
In 2019, a beluga was found off the coast of Norway that was believed to have most likely been trained by the Russian Navy. The beluga, called Hvaldimir, was wearing a harness that was labeled "Equipment of St. Petersburg", seemed comfortable around humans, and attempted to pull ropes from the sides of a Norwegian fishing vessel. Beluga research was conducted by the Murmansk Sea Biology Research Institute in northern Russia on behalf of the Russian Navy. Experiments were conducted to determine whether belugas could be used to “guard entrances to naval bases’” in arctic regions and "assist deepwater divers and if necessary kill any strangers who enter their territory". The research concluded that dolphins and seals were better suited to military use in polar conditions than belugas.


Tous is a genus of marsupial in the family Pseudocheiridae endemic to New Guinea and Australia. It contains two named species, the ring-tailed glider T. ayamaruensis (the type species) and T. stirtoni, both of which were originally described entirely based on fossils and presumed to be extinct. In the years following 2015, multiple sightings of T. ayamaruensis indicated it is still alive, making it a Lazarus species. Tous is characterized by the unique combination of both a strongly prehensile tail (also known in Hemibelideus) and a well-developed patagium (gliding membrane; also known in Petauroides). It is further distinguished from its closest relatives in the subfamily Hemibelideinae by its very small size, naked ears, ear ring, and non-bushy, tapering tail.
The genus Tous was described in 2026 by biologists Tim Flannery and Kristofer M. Helgen in a co-authored, collaborative paper with several other scientists. The scientists acknowledged the role of traditional landowners and their knowledge of T. ayamaruensis in their work. In the Maybrat language, the vernacular name for T. ayamaruensis is 'tous'.
Little is known of the behaviors and diet of T. ayamaruensis. It is a nocturnal, monogamous species that produces young once a year and eats leaves, tree sap, and maybe also invertebrates or fruit.
The species is threatened by habitat loss due to logging of forests in Papua New Guinea and West Papua.


This is an incomplete list of prehistoric mammals. It does not include extant mammals or recently extinct mammals. For extinct primate species, see: list of fossil primates.
Mammaliaformes
Genus †Adelobasileus Lucas & Hunt 1990
Genus †Bocaconodon Montellano, Hopson & Clark 2008
Genus †Delsatia Sigogneau-Russell & Godefroit 1997
Genus †Tricuspes von Huene 1933
Genus †Hadrocodium Luo, Crompton & Sun 2001
Genus †Fruitafossor Luo & Wible 2005
Order †Dinnetheria
Family †Dinnetheriidae Averianov & Lopatin 2011
Genus †Dinnetherium Jenkins, Crompton & Downs 1983
Order †Sinoconodontiformes
Family †Sinoconodontidae Mills 1971
Genus †Sinoconodon Patterson & Olson 1961
Order †Morganucodonta
Genus †Bridetherium Clemens 2011
Genus †Hallautherium Clemens 1980
Genus †Paceyodon Clemens 2011
Genus †Purbeckodon Butler et al. 2012
Genus †Rosierodon Debuysschere, Gherrbrant & Allain 2014
Family †Megazostrodontidae Cow 1986 sensu Kielan-Jaworowska, Cifelli & Luo 2004
Genus †Wareolestes Freeman 1979
Genus †Brachyzostrodon Sigogneau-Russell 1983a
Genus †Megazostrodon Crompton & Jenkins 1968
Family †Morganucodontidae Kühne 1958
Genus †Gondwanadon Datta & Das 1996
Genus †Holwellconodon Lucas & Hunt 1990
Genus †Indotherium Yadagiri 1984 non Kretzoi 1942
Genus †Indozostrodon Datta & Das 2001
Genus †Helvetiodon Clemens 1980
Genus †Erythrotherium Crompton 1964
Genus †Eozostrodon Parrington 1941
Genus †Morganucodon Kühne 1949
Order †Docodonta
Middle to Late Jurassic

Family †Docodontidae
Genus †Agilodocodon Meng et al. 2015
Genus †Docofossor Luo et al. 2015
Genus †Gondtherium Prasad & Manhas 2007
Genus †Cyrtlatherium Freeman 1979 sensu Sigogneau-Russell 2001
Genus †Haldanodon Kühne & Krusat 1972 sensu Sigoneau-Russell 2003
Genus †Borealestes Waldman & Savage 1972
Genus †Dsugarodon Pfretzschner et al. 2005 [Acuodulodon Hu, Meng & Clark 2007]
Genus †Castorocauda Ji et al. 2006
Genus †Simpsonodon Kermack et al. 1987
Genus †Krusatodon Sigogneau-Russell 2003
Genus †Hutegotherium Averianov et al. 2010
Genus †Tashkumyrodon Martin & Averianov 2004
Genus †Tegotherium Tatarinov 1994
Genus †Sibirotherium Maschenko, Lopatin & Voronkevich 2002
Genus †Reigitherium Bonaparte 1990
Genus †Peraiocynodon Simpson 1928
Genus †Docodon Marsh 1881 [Dicrocynodon Marsh 1880; Diplocynodon Marsh 1880 non Pomel 1847; Ennacodon Marsh 1890; Enneodon Marsh 1887 non Prangner 1845; Dryolestes Marsh 1879]
Order †Kuehneotheria
Family †Woustersiidae Sigogneau-Russell & Hahn 1995
Genus †Woutersia Sigogneau-Russell 1983b
Family †Kuehneotheriidae Kermack, Kermack & Musset 1968
Genus †Kuehneotherium Kermack, Kermack & Musset 1968
Genus †Kuehneon Kretzoi 1960 (nomen vanum)
Order †Eutriconodonta
Early Jurassic–Late Cretaceous

Genus ?†Dyskritodon Sigogneau-Russell 1995
Family †Amphidontidae Simpson 1925
Genus †Acinacodus Lopatin, Maschenko & Averianov 2010
Genus †Amphidon Simpson 1925
Genus †Gobiotheriodon Trofimov 1997 [Gobiodon Trofimov 1980 non Bleeker 1856]
Genus †Manchurodon Yabe & Shikama 1938
Genus †Nakunodon Yadagiri 1985
Genus †Aploconodon Simpson 1925
Genus †Comodon Kretzoi & Kretzoi 2000 non Stein 1859 [Phascolodon Simpson 1925; Phascolotheridium Cifelli & Dykes 2001]
Genus †Hakusanodon Rougier, Isaji & Manabe 2007
Genus †Juchilestes Gao, Wilson, Luo, Maga, Meng & Wang 2009
Family †Amphilestidae Osborn 1888 sensu Luo, Kielan-Jaworowska & Cifelli 2002 [Phascolotheriidae Osborn 1887]
Genus †Condorodon Gaetano & Rougier 2012
Genus †Kemchugia magna
Genus †Kryptotherium Sigogneau-Russell 2003
Genus †Liaotherium Zhou, Cheng & Wang 1991
Genus †Paikasigudodon Prasad & Manhas 2002 [Kotatherium yadagirii Prasad & Manhas 1997]
Genus †Amphilestes Owen 1871 [Amphitherium Owen 1845 non von Meyer non de Blainville 1838]
Genus †Phascolotherium Owen 1838 [Didelphys Broderip 1828; Thylacotherium Valenciennes 1838]
Genus †Tendagurodon Heinrich 1998
Family Jeholodentidae Luo et al. 2007
Genus †Jeholodens Luo, Chen, Li & Chen 2007
Genus †Yanoconodon Ji, Luo & Ji 1999
Family †Klameliidae Martin & Averianov 2007
Genus †Ferganodon Thomas & Averianov 2006
Genus †Klamelia Chow & Rich 1984
Family †Gobiconodontidae Chow & Rich 1984 sensu Luo, Kielan-Jaworowska & Cifelli 2002
Genus †Huasteconodon Montellano, Hopson & Clark 2008
Genus †Meemannodon Meng et al. 2005
Genus †Spinolestes Martin et al. 2015
Genus †Hangjinia Godefroit & Guo 1999
Genus †Gobiconodon Trofimov 1978 sensu Kielen-Jaworowsky & Dashzeveg 1998 [Guchinodon Trofimov 1978; Guchinodon Trofomiv 1974 nomen nudum]
Genus †Repenomamus Li et al. 2001
Clade †Volaticotheria Meng et al. 2006 emend. Meng et al. 2007
Genus †Volaticotherium Meng et al. 2006 emend. Meng et al. 2007
Genus †Ichthyoconodon Sigogneau-Russell 1995
Genus †Argentoconodon Rougier et al. 2007
Genus †Jugulator Cifelli & Madsen 1998
Genus †Triconolestes Engelmann & Callison 1998
Family †Triconodontidae Marsh 1887
Genus †Victoriaconodon Montellano et al. 2008
Genus †Priacodon Marsh 1887 [Tinodon]
Subfamily †Triconodontinae Marsh 1887 non Hay 1902
Genus †Triconodon Owen 1859 [Triacanthodon Owen 1871]
Genus †Trioracodon Simpson 1928 non Owen 1871
Subfamily †Alticonodontinae Fox 1976
Genus †Meiconodon Kusuhashi et al. 2009
Genus †Arundelconodon Cifelli et al. 1999
Genus †Astroconodon Patterson 1951
Genus †Alticonodon Fox 1969
Genus †Corviconodon Cifelli, Wible & Jenkins 1998
Symmetrodonta incertae sedis
Genus †Atlasodon Sigogneau-Russell 1991
Genus †Kennetheredium Sigogneau-Russell 2003a
Genus †Kotatherium Datta 1981
Genus †Trishulotherium Yadagiri 1985
Basal Cladotheria
Genus †Afriquiamus Sigogneau-Russell 1999
Genus †Butlerigale Kühne 1968 [?Dryolestes leiriensis]
Genus †Chunnelodon Ensom & Sigogneau-Russell 1998
Genus †Guimarota Kuhne 1968
Basal Zatheria
Genus †Minimus Sigogneau-Russell 1999
Genus †Magnimus Sigogneau-Russell 1999
Genus †Nanolestes Martin 2002
Family †Arguimuridae Dashzeveg 1994 [Arguitheriidae Dashzeveg 1994]
Genus †Arguimus 1979 [Arguitherium Dashzeveg 1994]
Family †Mozomuridae Li et al. 2005
Genus †Mozomus Li et al. 2005
Subclass YinotheriaOrder †Shuotherida
Family †Shuotheriidae Chow & Rich 1982
Genus †Itatodon Lopatin & Averianov 2005
Genus †Shuotherium Chow & Rich 1982
Genus †Paritatodon Martin & Averianov 2010
Genus †Pseudotribos Luo, Ji & Yuan 2007
Order †Ausktribosphenida
Family †Ausktribosphenidae Rich et al. 1997
Genus †Bishops Rich et al. 2001
Genus †Ausktribosphenos Rich et al. 1997
Order †Henosferida
Family †Henosferidae Rougier et al. 2007
Genus †Henosferus Rougier et al. 2007
Genus †Asfaltomylos Rauhut et al. 2002
Genus †Ambondro Flynn et al. 1999
Order Monotremata
Middle Cretaceous–Recent

Genus †Teinolophos Rich et al. 1999
Genus †Kryoryctes Pridmore et al. 2005
Family †Kollikodontidae Flannery et al. 1995
Genus †Kollikodon Flannery et al. 1995
Family Ornithorhynchidae Gray 1825 [Steropodontidae Archer et al. 1985] (Platypuses)
Genus †Monotrematum Pascual et al. 1992
Genus †Steropodon Archer et al. 1985
Genus †Obdurodon Woodburne & Tedford 1975
Family Tachyglossidae Gill 1872 [Echidnidae Burnett 1830] (echidnas, spiny anteaters)
Genus Zaglossus Gill 1877 [Proechidna Gervais 1877; Acanthoglossus Gervais 1877; Bruynia Dubois 1882; Bruijia Thomas 1883; Prozaglossus Kerbert 1913; Megalibgwilia Griffiths, Wells & Barrie 1991] (Extant genus with extinct species)
Subclass AllotheriaOrder †Haramiyida
Genus †Kirtlingtonia Butler & Hooker 2005 [tooth-taxa]
Genus †Millsoson Butler & Hooker 2005 [tooth-taxa]
Family †Haramiyaviidae Butler 2000
Genus †Haramiyavia Jenkins et al. 1997
Family †Eleutherodontidae Kermack et al. 1998 [Arboroharamiyidae Zheng et al. 2013; Euharamiyida Bi et al. 2014; Eleutherodontida Kermack et al. 1998]
Genus †Megaconus Zhou et al. 2013
Genus †Shenshou Bi et al. 2014
Genus †Arboroharamiya Zheng et al. 2013
Genus †Xianshou Bi et al. 2014
Genus †Sineleutherus Martin, Averianov & Pfretzschner 2010
Family †Theroteinidae Sigogneau-Russell, Frank & Hammerle 1986
Genus †Theroteinus Sigogneau-Russell, Frank & Hammerle 1986
Family †Thomasiidae Poche 1908 [Haramiyidae Simpson 1947 sensu Jenkins et al. 1997; Microlestidae Murry 1866; Microcleptidae Simpson 1928]
Genus †Eoraetia
Genus †Avashishta Anantharaman & al. 2006
Genus †Allostaffia Heinrich 2004 [Staffia Heinrich 1999  non Schubert 1911]
Genus †Thomasia Poche 1908 [Haramiya Simpson 1947; Hypnoprymnopsis Dawkins 1864; Microlestes Plieninger 1847 non Schmidt Goebel 1846; Microcleptes Simpson 1928 non Newman 1840; Plieningeria Krausse 1919; Stathmodon Henning 1911]
Order †Multituberculata
Late Jurassic–Eocene

Genus †Argillomys Cifelli, Gordon & Lipka 2013
Genus †Janumys erebos Eaton & Cifelli 2001
Genus †Xyronomys Rigby 1980
Family †Plagiaulacidae Gill 1872 sensu Kielan-Jaworowska & Hurum 2001 [Bolodontidae Osborn 1887]
Family †Hahnotheriidae Butler & Hooker 2005
Family †Kermackodontidae Butler & Hooker 2005
Family †Albionbaataridae Kielan-Jaworowska & Ensom 1994
Family †Eobaataridae Kielan-Jaworowska, Dashzeveg & Trofimov 1987
Superfamily †Allodontoidea Marsh 1889
Genus †Glirodon Engelmann & Callison 2001
Family †Arginbaataridae Hahn & Hahn 1983 non Trofimov 1980
Family †Zofiabaataridae Bakker 1992
Family †Allodontidae Marsh 1889
Superfamily †Paulchoffatioidea Hahn 1969 sensu Hahn & Hahn 2003
Genus †Mojo Hahn, LePage & Wouters 1987
Genus †Rugosodon Yuan et al. 2013
Family †Hahnodontidae Sigigneau-Russell 1991
Family †Pinheirodontidae Hahn & Hahn 1999
Family †Paulchoffatiidae Hahn 1969 sensu McKenna & Bell 1997
Suborder †Gondwanatheria
Family †Ferugliotheriidae Bonaparte 1986
Family †Sudamericidae Scillato-Yané & Pascual 1984 [Gondwanatheridae Bonaparte 1986]
Family †Groeberiidae Patterson 1952 sensu Flynn & Wyss 1999
Suborder †Cimolodonta
Genus †Ameribaatar Eaton & Cifelli 2001
Genus †Argentodites Kielan-Jaworowska et al. 2007
Genus †Bryceomysn Eaton 1995
Genus †Bubodens Wilson 1987
Genus †Cedaromys Eaton & Cifelli 2001
Genus †Clemensodon Krause 1992 [Kimbetohia cambi, in partim]
Genus †Dakotamys Eaton 1995
Genus †Fractimus Higgins 2003
Genus †Halodon Marsh 1889
Genus †Uzbekbaatar Kielan-Jaworowska & Nesov 1992
Genus †Viridomys Fox 1971
Genus †Paracimexomys Archibald 1982 [Barbatodon Rãdulescu & Samson 1987]
Genus †Cimexomys Sloan & Van Valen 1965 sensu stricto?
Genus †Fractinus Higgins 2003
Family †Corriebaataridae Rich et al. 2009
Family †Boffiidae Hahn & Hahn 1983 sensu Kielan-Jaworowska & Hurum 2001
Family †Cimolomyidae Marsh 1889 sensu Kielan-Jaworowska & Hurum 2001
Family †Kogaionidae Rãdulescu & Simpson 1996
Family †Eucosmodontidae Jepsen 1940
Family †Microcosmodontidae Holtzman & Wolberg 1977
Superfamily †Ptilodontoidea Cope 1887 sensu McKenna & Bell 1997 & Kielan-Jaworowska & Hurum 2001
Genus †Neoliotomus Jepsen 1930
Family †Cimolodontidae Marsh 1889 sensu Kielan-Jaworowska & Hurum 2001
Family †Ptilodontidae Cope 1887 sensu McKenna & Bell 1997
Superfamily †Taeniolabidoidea Granger & Simpson 1929 sensu Kielan-Jaworowska & Hurum 2001
Family †Taeniolabididae Granger & Simpson 1929
Superfamily †Djadochtatheroidea Kielan-Jaworowska & Hurum 1997 sensu Kielan-Jaworowska & Hurum 2001 Djadochtatheria Kielan-Jaworowska & Hurum 1997]
Genus †Bulganbaatar Kielan-Jaworowska 1974
Genus †Nemegtbaatar Kielan-Jaworowska 1974
Genus †Pentacosmodon Jepsen 1940
Family †Chulsanbaataridae Kielan-Jaworowska 1974
Family †Sloanbaataridae Kielan-Jaworowska 1974
Family †Djadochtatheriidae Kielan-Jaworowska & Hurum 1997
Subclass TheriaBasal Theria
Genus †Aethomylos Novacek 1976
Genus †Anisorhizus Ameghino 1902 (notoungulate)
Genus †Falepterus Clemens & Lillegraven 1986
Genus †Paleomolops Cifelli 1994
Genus †Tetraprothomo Ameghino 1902 non Ameghino 1884
Genus †Tribotherium Sigogneau-Russell 1991
Genus †Zygiocuspis Cifelli 1990
Family †Endotheriidae Shikama 1947
Genus †Endotherium Shikama 1947
Family †Kermackiidae Butler 1978
Genus †Kermackia Slaughter 1971 [Trinictitherium Butler 1978]
Family †Plicatodontidae Ameghino 1904
Genus †Plicatodon Ameghino 1904
Family †Potamotelsidae Nesov 1987
Genus †Potamotelses Fox 1972 non Nesov 1987
Family †Russellmyidae Estravis 1990
Genus †Russellmys Estravis 1990
Infraclass †Pantotheria
Genus †Tribactonodon Sigogneau-Russell, Hooker & Ensom 2001
Genus †Paraungulatum Bonaparte 1999
Genus †Argaliatherium Cifelli & Davis 2015
Genus †Carinalestes Cifelli & Davis 2015
Genus †Hypomylos Sigogneau-Russell 1992
Family †Casamiqueliidae Bonaparte 1999
Genus †Casamiquelia Bonaparte 1990 [after Averianov 2002]
Genus †Rougiertherium Bonaparte 1999
Genus †Alamitherium Bonaparte 1999
Family †Brandoniidae Bonaparte 1992
Genus †Brandonia Bonaparte 1992
Family †Donodontidae Sigogneau-Russell 1991
Genus †Donodon Sigogneau-Russell 1991
Family †Paurodontidae Marsh 1887 non Thorne 1941
Genus †Araeodon Simpson 1937
Genus †Archaeotrigon Simpson 1927
Genus †Brancatherulum Dietrich 1927
Genus †Comotherium Prothero 1981
Genus †Dorsetodon Ensom & Sigogneau-Russell 1998
Genus †Drescheratherium Krebs 1998
Genus †Euthlastus Simpson 1927
Genus †Foxraptor Bakker & Carpenter 1990
Genus †Henkelotherium Krebs 1991
Genus †Paurodon Marsh 1887
Genus †Tathiodon (Simpson 1927) Simpson 1927 [Tanaodon Simpson1927 non Kirk 1927; Pelicopsis Simpson 1927]
Family †Vincelestidae Bonaparte 1986
Genus †Vincelestes Bonaparte 1986
Family †Picopsidae Fox 1980
Genus †Picopsis Fox 1980
Genus †Tirotherium Montellano-Ballesteros & Fox 2015
Order †Spalacotheriida
Genus †Gobiotheriodon Trofimov 1997 sensu Averianov 2002 [Gobiodon Trofimov 1980 non Bleeker 1856]
Genus †Maotherium Rougier, Ji & Novacek 2003
Family †Thereuodontidae Sigogneau-Russell 1998
Genus †Thereuodon Sigogneau-Russell 1987
Family †Zhangheotheriidae Rougier, Ji & Novacek 2003
Genus †Zhangheotherium Hu et al. 1997
Family †Tinodontidae Fox 1985
Subfamily †Bondesiinae Bonaparte 1990
Genus †Bondesius Bonaparte 1990 [?archaeonycterid microbat; dryolestid milk teeth (Averianov 2002)]
Subfamily †Tinodontinae
Genus †Mictodon Fox 1984
Genus †Yermakia Lopatin et al. 2005 [?Ungulatomorpha]
Genus †Tinodon Marsh 1879 [Menacodon Marsh 1887; Eurylambda Simpson 1929a]
Family †Barbereniidae Bonaparte 1990
Genus †Quirogatherium Bonaparte 1990 [? dryolestid milk teeth (Averianov 2002)]
Genus †Barberenia Bonaparte 1990 [? dryolestid milk teeth (Averianov 2002)]
Family †Spalacotheriidae Marsh 1887 [Peratheridae Osborn 1887]
Genus †Infernolestes Cifelli, Davis & Sames 2014
Genus †Microderson Sigogneau-Russell 1991 [? stem-group zatherian (Averianov 2002)]
Genus †Shalbaatar Nesov 1997
Genus †Yaverlestes Sweetman 2008
Subfamily †Spalacotheriinae Marsh 1887
Genus †Spalacotherium Owen 1854 [Peralestes Owen 1871]
Subfamily †Spalacolestinae Cifelli & Madsen 1999
Genus †Aliaga Cuenca-Bescós et al. 2014
Genus †Symmetrolestes Tsubamoto et al. 2004
Genus †Akidolestes Li & Luo 2006
Genus †Heishanlestes Hu, Fox, Wang & Li 2005
Genus †Spalacotheroides Patterson 1955
Genus †Spalacotheridium Cifelli 1990c
Genus †Spalacolestes Cifelli 1999
Genus †Symmetrodontoides Fox 1979 [?Dryolestidans Bonaparte 1999]
Order †Meridiolestida
Genus †Leonardus Bonaparte 1990
Genus †Cronopio Rougier, Apesteguia & Gaetano 2011
Family †Necrolestidae Ameghino 1894
Genus †Necrolestes Ameghino 1894 sensu Rougier et al. 2012
Superfamily †Mesungulatoidea
Family †Reigitheriidae Bonaparte 1990
Genus †Reigitherium Bonaparte 1990
Family †Peligotheriidae Bonaparte, Van Valen & Kramartz 1993
Genus †Peligrotherium Bonaparte, Van Valen & Kramartz 1993
Family †Mesungulatidae Bonaparte 1986 sensu Rougier et al. 2009
Genus †Coloniatherium Rougier et al. 2009
Genus †Mesungulatum Bonaparte & Soria 1985
Family †Austrotriconodontidae Bonaparte 1992
Genus †Austrotriconodon Bonaparte 1986b
Order †Dryolestida
Family †Dryolestidae Marsh 1879
Genus †Anthracolestes Averianov, Martin & Lopatin 2014
Genus †Guimarotodus Martin 1999
Genus †Krebsotherium Martin 1999
Genus †Phascolestes Owen 1871
Genus †Lakotalestes Cifelli, Davis & Sames 2014
Genus †Laolestes Simpson 1927
Genus †Melanodon Simpson 1927 [Malthacolestes Simpson 1927]
Genus †Amblotherium Owen 1871 [Stylodon Owen 1866 non Beck 1837; Achyrodon Owen 1871; Odontostylus Trouessant 1898; Trouessartia Cossman 1899 non Canestrini & Kramer 1899; Trouessartiella Cossman 1899; Stylacodon Marsh 1879; Laodon Marsh 1887; Kepolestes Simpson 1927]
Genus †Dryolestes Marsh 1878 [Asthenodon Marsh 1887; Herpetairus Simpson 1927; Laolestes Simpson 1927]
Genus †Portopinheirodon Martin 1999
Genus †Peraspalax Owen 1871 [Amblotherium Lydekker 1887]
Genus †Kurtodon Osborn 1887 [Athrodon Osborn 1887 non Sauvage 1880; Odontocyrtus Trouessart 1905]
Genus †Crusafontia Henkel & Krebs 1969
Genus †Groeberitherium Bonaparte 1986
Order †Amphitheriida
Family †Amphitheriidae Owen 1846
Genus †Amphibetulimus Lopatin & Averianov 2007
Genus †Amphitherium de Blainville 1838 non Owen 1845 non von Meyer [Amphigonus Agassiz 1838; Amphitylus Osborn 1888; Botheratiotherium de Blainville 1838; Heterotherium de Blainville 1838 non Fischer de Waldheim 1822; Thylacotherium Valenciennes 1838]
Order †Peramurida
Family †Peramuridae Kretzoi 1946
Genus †Kiyatherium Maschenko, Lopatin & Voronkevich 2002
Genus †Tendagurutherium Heinrich 1998
Genus †Peramuroides Davis 2012
Genus †Kuriogenys Davis 2012
Genus †Peramus Owen 1871 [Leptocladus Owen 1871]
Genus †Palaeoxonodon Freeman 1976
Genus †Abelodon Brunet et al. 1991
Genus †Pocamus Canudo & Cuenca-Bescós 1996
Order †Aegialodontia
Family †Aegialodontidae Kermack 1967
Genus †Aegialodon Kermack, Lees & Mussett 1965
Genus †Kielantherium Dashzeveg 1975
Order †Pappotherida
Family †Pappotheriidae Slaughter 1965
Genus †Paraisurus non Glikman 1957
Genus †Pappotherium Slaughter 1965
Genus †Slaughteria Butler 1978
Infraclass Metatheria
Late Cretaceous–Recent
Metatheria incertae sedis
Genus †Sinodelphys Luo et al. 2003
Genus †Anchistodelphys Cifelli 1990
Genus †Arcantiodelphs Vullo, Gherbrant Muizon & Neraudeau 2009
Genus †Dakotadens Eaton 1993
Genus †Camptomus Marsh 1889
Genus †Iqualadelphys Fox 1987
Family †Adinodontidae Hershkovitz 1995
Genus †Adinodon Hershkovitz 1995
Genus †Varalphadon Johanson 1996
Genus †Bistius Clemens & Lillegraven 1986
Genus †Turgidodon Cifelli 1990
Genus †Swainadelphys Johanson 1996
Genus †Esteslestes Novacek et al. 1991
Genus †Copedelphys Korth 1994
Genus †Itaboraidelphys Marshall & de Muizon 1984
Genus †Marmosopsis Couto 1962
Genus †Mizquedelphys Marshall & de Muizon 1988
Genus †Otolicnus Illiger 1811
Genus †Pauladelphys Goin et al. 1999
Genus †Pucadelphys Marshall & de Muizon 1988
Genus †Andinodelphys Marshall & de Muizon 1988
Genus †Szalinia de Muizon & Cifelli 2001
Genus †Djarthia Godthelp, Wroe & Archer 1999
Family †Jaskhadelphysidae Marshall & de Muizon 1988
Genus †Jaskhadelphys Marshall & de Muizon 1988
Family †Herpetotheriidae Trouessant 1879
Genus †Herpetotherium Cope 1873
Genus †Amphiperatherium Filhol 1879 [Oxygomphius von Meyer 1846 nomen oblitum; Microtarsioides Weigelt 1933; Ceciliolemur Weigelt 1933; Ceciliolemuridae Weigelt 1933]
Genus †Asiadidelphis Gabunia, Shevyreva & Gabunia 1990
Genus †Garadelphys [Garatherium Crochet 1984]
Genus †Golerdelphys Williamson & Lofgren 2014
Genus †Entomacodon Marsh 1872 [Centracodon Marsh 1872]
Genus †Maastrichtidelphys Martin et al. 2005
Genus †Nortedelphys Case, Goin & Woodburne 2005
Genus †Rumiodon Goin & Candela 2004
Family †Hondadelphidae Marshall, Case & Woodburne 1990
Genus †Hondadelphys Marshall 1976
Basal Metatheria
Genus †Aenigmadelphys Cifelli & Johanson 1994
Genus †Archaeonothos Beck 2015
Genus †Duquettichnus  Sarjeant & Thulborn 1986 {Marsupialipida} [trace fossils]
Genus †Ghamidtherium Sánches-Villagra et al. 2007
Genus †Kasserinotherium Crochet 1989
Genus †Palangania Goin et al. 1998
Genus †Perrodelphys Goin et al. 1999
Family †Numbigilgidae Beck et al. 2008
Genus †Numbigilga Beck et al. 2008
Ameridelphia incertae sedis
Genus †Adelodelphys Cifelli 2004
Genus †Apistodon Davis 2007
Genus †Cocatherium Goin et al. 2006
Genus †Iugomortiferum Cifelli 1990b
Genus †Marambiotherium Goin et al. 1999
Genus †Pascualdelphys fierroensis
Genus †Progarzonia Ameghino 1904
Genus †Protalphadon Cifelli 1990
Genus †Sinbadelphys Cifelli 2004
Order †Protodelphia
Family †Holoclemensiidae Alpin & Archer 1987
Genus †Holoclemensia Slaughter 1968 [Clemensia Slaughter 1968 non Packard 1864; Comanchea Jacobs, Winkler & Murry 1989]
Order †Deltatheroida
Genus †Atokatheridium Kielan-Jaworowska & Cifelli 2001
Genus †Khuduklestes Nesov, Sigogneau-Russell & Russell 1994
Family †Deltatheridiidae Gregory & Simpson 1926 [Nanocuridae Fox, Scott & Bryant 2007; Sulestinae Nessov 1985]
Genus †Hydotherium Gregory & Simpson 1926
Genus †Lotheridium Bi et al. 2015
Genus †Nanocuris Fox, Scott & Bryant 2007
Genus †Prodeltitheridium Trofimov 1984
Genus †Oklatheridium Davis, Cifelli & Kielan-Jaworowska 2008
Genus †Oxlestes Nesov 1982
Genus †Deltatheridium Gregory & Simpson 1926
Genus †Sulestes Nesov 1985 [Deltatherus Nesov 1997; Marsasia Nesov 1997]
Genus †Tsagandelta Rougier, Davis & Novacek 2015
Genus †Deltatheroides Gregory & Simpson 1926
Order †Asiadelphia
Family †Asiatheriidae Trofimov & Szalay 1994 [Asiadelphidae Trofimov & Szalay 1994]
Genus †Kokopellia Cifelli 1993
Genus †Asiatherium Trofimov & Szalay 1994 [Asiatherium Trofimov & Cuny 1993 (nomen nudum)]
Order †Alphadontia
Family †Alphadontidae Marshall, Case & Woodburne 1990
Genus †Eoalphadon Eaton 2009
Genus †Albertatherium Fox 1971
Genus †Alphadon Simpson 1927
Family †Pediomyidae Simpson 1927 [Aquiladelphidae Davis 2007]
Genus †Monodelphopsis de Paula Couto 1952 [? microbiotheriid (Marshall et al. 1990)]
Genus †Protolambda Osborn 1898 [Synconodon Osborn 1898]
Genus †Leptalestes Davis 2007
Genus †Aquiladelphis Fox 1971
Genus †Pediomys Marsh 1889
Family †Stagodontidae Marsh 1889 sensu McKenna & Bell 1997
Genus †Boreodon Lambe 1902 (nomen dubium)
Genus †Pariadens Cifelli & Eaton 1987
Genus †Delphodon Simpson 1927
Genus †Eodelphis Matthew 1916
Genus †Didelphodon Marsh 1889 [Diaphorodon Archer 1869; Stagodon Marsh 1889; Thlaeodon Cope 1892; Ectoconodon Osborn 1898; Didelphops Marsh 1889]
Order †Simpsonitheria
Genus †Hondonadia Goin & Candela 1998
Superfamily †Caroloameghinioidea Ameghino 1901 sensu Marshall 1987
Genus †Hatcheritherium Case, Goin & Woodburne 2005
Family †Chulpasiidae Sigé et al. 2009
Genus †Chulpasia Crochet & Sigé 1993
Family †Glasbiidae Clemens 1966 sensu Archer 1984
Genus †Glasbius Clemens 1966
Family †Caroloameghiidae Ameghino 1901
Genus †Procaroloameghinia Marshall 1982
Genus †Robertbutleria Marshall 1987
Genus †Caroloameghinia Ameghino 1901
Superfamily †Argyrolagoidea Ameghino 1904 sensu Simpson 1970
Family †Gashterniidae Marshall 1987
Genus †Gashternia Simpson 1935
Family †Argyrolagidae Ameghino 1904 [Microtragulidae Reig 1955]
Genus †Proargyrolagus Wolff 1984
Genus †Hondalagus Villarroel & Marshall 1988
Genus †Argyrolagus Ameghino 1904 [Microtragulus Ameghino 1904 McKenna & Bell 1997]
Genus †Microtragulus Ameghino 1904 [Argyrolagus Ameghino 1904 sensu McKenna & Bell 1997]
Order †Peradectia
Family †Peradectidae Crochet 1979
Genus †Armintodelphys Krishtalka & Stucky 1983
Genus †Indodelphis Bajpai et al. 2005
Genus †Mimoperadectes Bown & Rose 1979
Genus †Nanodelphys McGrew 1937 Didelphidectes Hough 1961
Genus †Alloeodectes Russell 1984
Genus †Sinoperadectes Storch & Qui 2002
Genus †Siamoperadectes Ducrocq et al. 1992
Genus †Peradectes Matthew & Granger 1921 [Thylacodon Matthew & Granger 1921]
Order †Sparassodonta
Genus †Dukecynus Goin 1997
Genus †Pseudonotictis Marschall 1981
Genus †Sallacyon Villarroel & Marshall 1982 [Andinogale Hoffstetter & Petter 1983]
Family †Mayulestidae de Muizon 1994
Genus †Mayulestes de Muizon 1994
Genus †Allqokirus Marshall & de Muizon 1988
Family †Proborhyaenidae Ameghino 1897 [Arminiheringiidae Ameghino 1902]
Genus †Arminiheringia Ameghino 1902 [Dilestes Ameghino 1902]
Genus †Callistoe Babot, Powell & Muizon 2002
Genus †Paraborhyaena Hoffstetter & Petter 1983
Genus †Proborhyaena Ameghino 1897
Family †Prothylacinidae Ameghino 1894
Genus †Pseudothylacinus Ameghino 1902
Genus †Prothylacynus Ameghino 1891 [Prothylacocyon Winge 1923; Napodonictis Ameghino 1894]
Genus †Lycopsis Cabrera 1927
Genus †Stylocynus Mercerat 1917
Genus †Pseudolycopsis Marshall 1976
Family †Thylacosmilidae Riggs 1933 sensu Marshall 1976
Genus †Achlysictis Ameghino 1891
Genus †Anachlysictis Goin 1997
Genus †Patagosmilus Forasiepi & Carlini 2010
Genus †Hyaenodontops Ameghino 1908 [?Thylacosmilus Riggs 1933]
Genus †Notosmilus Kraglievich 1960 [?Thylacosmilus Riggs 1933]
Genus †Thylacosmilus Riggs 1933 [?Notosmilus Kraglievich 1960; ?Hyaenodontops Ameghino 1908; Achlysictis Ameghino 1891; Acrohyaenodon Ameghino 1904]
Family †Hathliacynidae Ameghino 1894 [Cladictidae Winge 1923; Cladosictidae Cabreta 1927; Cladosictinae Cabrera 1927; Acyonidae Ameghino 1889; Amphiproviverridae Ameghino 1894]
Genus †Patene Simpson 1935 [Ischyrodelphis de Paula Couto 1952]
Genus †Palaeocladosictis de Paula Couto 1961
Genus †Procladosictis Ameghino 1902
Genus †Contrerascynus Mones 2014 [Simpsonia Contreras 1990 non]
Genus †Pseudocladosictis Ameghino 1902
Genus †Notogale Loomis 1914
Genus †Cladosictis Ameghino 1887 [Amphithereutes Ameghino 1935; Agustylus Ameghino 1887; Hathliacynus Ameghino 1887;  Ictioborus  Ameghino 1891; Anatherium Ameghino 1887; Acyon Ameghino 1887]
Genus †Sipalocyon Ameghino 1887 [Thylacodictis Mercerat 1891; Amphiproviverra Ameghino 1891; Protoproviverra Ameghino 1891 non Lemoine 1891; Perathereutes Ameghino 1891]
Genus †Chasicostylus Reig 1957
Genus †Notictis Ameghino 1889
Genus †Notocynus Mercerat 1891
Genus †Borhyaenidium Pascual & Bocchino 1963 [Pascual & Ringuelet 1963]
Family †Borhyaenidae Ameghino 1894 [Sparassodontidae Roger 1896; Conodonictidae Ameghino 1935] ()
Genus †Nemolestes Ameghino 1902
Genus †Argyrolestes Ameghino 1902
Genus †Angelocabrerus Simpson 1970
Genus †Australohyaena Forasiepi, Babot & Zimicz 2014
Genus †Fredszalaya Shockey & Anaya 2008
Genus †Pharsophorus Ameghino 1897 [Plesiofelis Roth 1903]
Genus †Borhyaena Ameghino 1887 [Arctodictis Mercerat 1891; Conodonictis Ameghino 1891; Dynamictis Ameghino 1891; Pseudoborhyaena Ameghino 1902]
Genus †Acrocyon Ameghino 1887
Genus †Eutemnodus Bravard 1858 [Eutemnodus Burmeister 1885; Apera Ameghino 1886 non Adanson 1763; Entemnodus Trouessant 1885]
Genus †Parahyaenodon Ameghino 1904
Order Didelphimorphia
Family †Derorhynchidae Marshall 1987
Genus †Minusculodelphis de Paula Couto 1962
Genus †Derorhynchus de Paula Couto 1952
Family †Sparassocynidae Reig 1958 sensu Archer 1984
Genus †Sparassocynus Mercerat 1898 [Perazoyphium Cebrera 1928]
Family Didelphidae Gray 1821 (American opossums)
Genus †Incadelphys Marshall & de Muizon 1988
Genus †Coona Simpson 1938
Genus †Sairadelphys Oliveira et al. 2011
Subfamily †Eobrasiliinae Marshall 1987
Genus †Tiulordia Marshall & de Muizon 1988
Genus †Eobrasilia Simpson 1947
Genus †Gaylordia de Paula Couto 1952 [Xenodelphis de Paula Couto 1962]
Genus †Didelphopsis de Paula Couto 1952
Subfamily Didelphinae Grey 1821
Tribe Didelphini Grey 1821
Genus †Hyperdidelphys Ameghino 1904 [Paradidelphys Ameghino 1904; Cladodidelphys Ameghino 1904]
Genus †Thylophorops Reig 1952
Tribe Marmosini Hershkovitz 1992 [Monodelphinae Talice, de Mosera & Machado 1960 nomen nudum sensu Hershkovitz; Monodelphini Talice, de Mosera & Machado 1960 nomen nudum sensu McKenna & Bell 1997]
Subtribe †Zygolestina Marshall 1982
Genus †Zygolestes Ameghino 1898
Subtribe Monodelphina Talice, de Mosera & Machado 1960 [Marmosidae Hershkovitz 1992; Lestodelphyinae Hershkovitz 1992]
Genus †Thylatheridium Reig 1952
Order Paucituberculata
Genus †Bardalestes Goin et al. 2009 [Dracolestes Goin et al. 2009 nomen nudum
Genus †Evolestes Goin et al. 2007
Superfamily Caenolestoidea Trouessant 1898 sensu Osborn 1910 [Palaeothentoidea Goin et al. 2009]
Genus †Riolestes Goin et al. 2009
Genus †Carolopaulacoutoia McKenna & Bell 1997 [Sternbergia de Paula Couto 1970 non Jordan & Gilbert 1925]
Family †Palaeothentidae Sinclair 1906  [Epanorthidae Ameghino 1889; Decastidae Ameghino 1893 ]
Genus †Antawallathentes Rincón et al. 2015
Genus †Hondathentes Dumont & Bown 1997  [Hondathentes Dumont & Bown 1993 nomen nudum ]
Genus †Sasawatsu Goin & Candela 2004
Subfamily †Acdestinae Bown & Fleagle 1993
Genus †Acdestoides Bown & Fleagle 1993
Genus †Acdestodon Bown & Fleagle 1993
Genus †Trelewthentes Bown & Fleagle 1993
Genus †Acdestis Ameghino 1887 [Dipilus Ameghino 1890; Decastis Ameghino 1891; Callomenus Ameghino 1891]
Subfamily †Palaeothentinae Sinclair 1906
Genus †Palaeothentes Ameghino 1887  [Epanorthus Ameghino 1889; Essoprion Ameghino 1891; Halmadromus Ameghino 1891; Halmaselus Ameghino 1891; Metriodromus Ameghino 1894; Metaepanorthus Ameghino 1894; Paraepanorthus Ameghino 1894; Prepanorthus Ameghino 1894; Cladoclinus Ameghino 1894; Palaepanorthus Ameghino 1902]
Genus †Titanothentes Rae, Bown & Fleagle 1996
Genus †Pilchenia Ameghino 1903
Genus †Carlothentes Bown & Fleagle 1993
Genus †Propalaeothentes Bown & Fleagle 1993
Family †Abderitidae Ameghino 1889
Genus †Pitheculites Ameghino 1902 [Eomannodon Ameghino 1902b; Micrabderites Simpson 1932]
Genus †Abderites Ameghino 1887 [Homunculites Ameghino 1902; Homunculites Ameghino 1901 nomen nudum]
Family Caenolestidae Trouessant 1898 Garzoniidae Ameghino 1890] (Shrew Opossums)
Genus †Fieratherium Forasiepi et al. 2013
Genus †Perulestes Goin & Candela 2004
Subfamily †Pichipilinae Marshall 1980 sensu McKenna & Bell 1997
Genus †Pichipilus Ameghino 1890
Genus †Phonocdromus Ameghino 1894
Genus †Pliolestes Reig 1955
Subfamily Caenolestinae Trouessant 1898
Genus †Pseudhalmarhiphus Ameghino 1903
Genus †Stilotherium Ameghino 1887 [Garzonia Ameghino 1891; Halmatorhiphus Winge 1923; Parhalmarhiphus Ameghino 1894; Halmarhiphus Ameghino 1891]
Order †Polydolopimorphia
Family †Protodidelphidae Marshall 1987
Genus †Carolocoutoia Goin, Oliveira & Candela 1998
Genus †Bobbschaefferia de Paula Couto 1970 [Schaefferia Paula Couto 1952 non Absolon 1900 non Houbert 1918; Depaulacoutonia Kretzoi & Kretzoi 2000]
Genus †Zeusdelphys Marshall 1982
Genus †Periprotodidelphis Oliveira & Goin 2011
Genus †Protodidelphis de Paula Couto 1952 [Robertbutleria Marshall 1987]
Genus †Guggenheimia de Paula Couto 1952
Genus †Reigia Pascual 1983
Superfamily †Polydolopoidea Ameghino 1897 sensu Clemens & Marshall 1976
Genus †Rosendolops Goin & Candela 1996
Genus †Ectocentrocristus Rigby & Wolberg 1987 sensu Case, Goin & Woodburne 2005
Family †Sillustaniidae Crochet & Sigé 1996
Genus †Sillustania Crochet & Sigé 1996
Family †Bonapartheriidae Pascual 1980 [Epidolopinae Pascual & Bond 1981 non Marshall 1982]
Genus †Epidolops de Paula Couto 1952 sensu Goin & al 2003
Genus †Bonapartherium Pascual 1980
Family †Prepidolopidae Pascual 1980
Genus †Prepidolops Pascual 1980
Genus †Wamradolops Goin & Candela 2004
Genus †Incadolops Goin & Candela 2004
Family †Polydolopidae Ameghino 1897 [Promysopidae Ameghino 1902]
Genus †Roberthoffstetteria Marshall, de Muizon & Sigé 1983 sensu Goin & al 2003
Subfamily Parabderitinae Marshall 1980 sensu McKenna & Bell 1997
Genus †Parabderites Ameghino 1902 [Tideus Ameghino 1890 non Koch 1837; Mannodon Ameghino 1893]
Subfamily Polydolopinae Ameghino 1897 sensu Pascual & Bond 1981
Genus †Polydolops Ameghino 1897 [Pliodolops Ameghino 1902; Orthodolops Ameghino 1903; Anissodolops Ameghino 1903; Archaeodolops Ameghino 1903; Antarctodolops Woodburne & Zinsmeister 1984]
Genus †Amphidolops Ameghino 1902 [Anadolops Ameghino 1903; Seumadia Simpson 1935]
Genus †Eudolops Ameghino 1902 [Promysops Ameghino 1902; Propolymastodon Ameghin 1903]
Genus †Pseudolops Ameghino 1902
Genus †Eurydolops Case, Woodburne & Chaney 1988
Order †Yalkaparidontia
Family †Yalkaparidontidae Archer, Hand & Godthelp 1988
Genus †Yalkaparidon Archer, Hand & Godthelp 1988 [Thingodonta; Yalkaperidon (sic)]
Order Notoryctemorphia
Family Notoryctidae Ogilby 1892 (marsupial moles)
Genus †Naraboryctes Archer et al. 2010
Order Dasyuromorphia
Genus †Mayigriphus Wroe 1997b
Genus †Joculosium Wroe 1999b
Family Thylacinidae Bonaparte 1838 (marsupial wolves)
Genus †Maximucinus Wroe 2001
Genus †Muribacinus Wroe 1996
Genus †Mutpuracinus Murray & Megirian 2000
Genus †Badjcinus Muirhead & Wroe 1998
Genus †Nimbacinus Muirhead & Archer 1990
Genus †Ngamalacinus Muirhead 1997
Genus †Wabulacinus Muirhead 1997
Genus †Tyarrpecinus Murray & Megirian 2000
Genus †Thylacinus Temminck 1827 [Paracyon Gray 1842; Paracyon Gray 1827 nomen nudum; Peracyon Gray 1825 nomen nudum; Peralopex Gloger 1841; Lycaon (sic) Wagler 1830 non Brookes 1827]
Family Dasyuridae Goldfuss 1820 (marsupial mice and allies)
Genus †Archerium Wroe & Mackness 2000
Genus †Ganbulanyi Wroe 1998
Genus †Glaucodon Stirton 1957
Subfamily †Barinyainae Wroe 1999
Genus †Barinya Wroe 1999
Subfamily Dasyurinae Goldfuss 1820
Tribe Dasyurini Goldfuss 1820 [Phascolosoricinae Archer 1982; Parantechini Archer 1982]
Genus †Wakamatha Archer & Rich 1979
Genus †Dasylurinja Archer 1982 [McKenna & Bell 1997]
Genus †Ankotarinja Archer 1976 [Archer 1982]
Genus †Keeuna Archer 1976
Order Peramelemorphia
Genus †Crash Travouillon et al. 2014
Genus †Kutjamarcoot Chamberlain et al. 2016
Genus †Thylacotinga Archer, Godthelp & Hand 1993
Superfamily †Yaraloidea Muirhead 2000
Family †Yaralidae Muirhead 2000
Genus †Yarala Muirhead & Filan 1995
Superfamily Perameloidea Gray 1825 sensu Waterhouse 1838
Genus †Galadi Travouillon et al. 2010
Genus †Bulungu Gurovichet al. 2013
Genus †Madju Travouillon et al. 2015
Family Thylacomyidae Archer & Kirsch 1977 (rabbit-eared bandicoots/bilbies)
Genus †Ischnodon Stirton 1955
Genus †Liyamayi Travouillon et al. 2014
Family Peramelidae Gray 1825 (Australian bandicoots)
Family †Chaeropodidae Gill 1872 (pig-footed bandicoots)
Genus †Chaeropus Ogilby 1838
Family Peroryctidae Archer et al. 1989 (New Guinean bandicoots)
Order Microbiotheria
Family Woodburnodontidae Goin et al. 2007
Genus †Woodburnodon Goin et al. 2007
Family Microbiotheriidae Ameghino 1887 [Clenialitidae Ameghino1909; Mirandatheriinae Szalay 1994] (Monito del Monte)
Genus †Khasia Marshall & de Muizon 1988
Genus †Mirandatherium Paula Couto 1952 [Mirandaia Paula Couto 1952 non Travassos 1937]
Genus †Microbiotherium Ameghino 1887 [Stylognathus Ameghino 1891; Eodidelphys Ameghino 1891; Prodidelphys Ameghino 1891; Hadrorhynchus Ameghino 1891; Proteodidelphys Ameghino 1898; Oligobiotherium Ameghino 1902; Clenia Ameghino 1904; Clenialites Ameghino 1906; Microbiotheridion Ringuelet 1953]
Genus †Eomicrobiotherium  Marshall 1982
Genus †Ideodelphys Ameghino 1902 [Ideodidelphys Schlosser 1923]
Genus †Kirutherium Goin & Candela 2004
Genus †Pachybiotherium Ameghino 1902
Genus †Pitheculus Ameghino 1894
Order Diprotodontia
Genus †Brachalletes de Vis 1883
Genus †Koalemus de Vis 1889
Genus †Sthenomerus de Vis 1883
Genus †Nimbadon Hand et al. 1993
Family †Palorchestidae Tate 1948
Genus †Propalorchestes Murray 1986
Genus †Ngapakaldia Stirton 1967
Genus †Palorchestes Owen 1874 [Palorchestes Owen 1873 nomen nudum]
Genus †Pitikantia Stirton 1967
Family †Wynyardiidae Osgood 1921
Genus †Wynyardia Spencer 1901
Genus †Muramura Pledge 1987
Genus †Namilamadeta Rich & Archer 1979 [Wombaroo]
Family †Thylacoleonidae Gill 1872 (marsupial lions)
Genus †Priscileo Rauscher 1987
Genus †Thylacoleo Owen 1848 [Thylacoleon Winge 1893; Schizodon Stutchbury 1853 non Agassiz 1829 non Waterhouse 1842; Plectodon Krefft 1870; Prochaeris De Vis 1886; Thylacopardus Owen 1888]
Genus †Wakaleo Clemens & Plane 1974
Suborder Vombatiformes
Superfamily Phascolarctoidea Woodburne 1984
Family Phascolarctidae Owen 1839 [Koalidae Burnett 1830]
Genus †Cundokoala Pledge 1992b
Genus †Nimiokoala Black & Archer 1997
Genus †Perikoala Stirton 1957
Genus †Madakoala Woodburne et al. 1987
Genus †Litokoala Stirton, Tedford & Woodburne 1967
Genus †Koobor Archer 1976
Superfamily Vombatoidea Burnett 1830
Family †Ilariidae Tedford & Woodburne 1987
Genus †Kuterintja Pledge 1987
Genus †Ilaria Tedford & Woodburne 1987
Family Vombatidae Burnett 1830 [Phascolomidae Gray 1821; Phascolomyidae Owen 1839] (wombats)
Genus †Nimbavombatus Brewer et al. 2015
Genus †Phascolonus Owen 1827 [Sceparnodon Ramsay 1881 non Ramsay 1880] (giant wombat)
Genus †Ramsayia Tate 1951
Genus †Rhizophascolonus Stirton, Tedford & Woodburne 1967
Genus †Sedophascolomys Louys 2015
Genus †Warendja Hope & Wilkinson 1982
Family †Diprotodontidae Gill 1872 [Nototheriidae Lydekker 1887]
Genus †Bematherium Tedford 1967
Genus †Pyramios Woodburne 1967
Genus †Nototherium Owen 1845
Genus †Meniscolophus Stirton 1955
Genus †Euryzygoma Longman 1921
Genus †Diprotodon Owen 1838 [Diarcodon Stephenson 1963]
Genus †Euowenia de Vis 1891 [Owenia de Vis 1888 non Presch 1847 non Delle Chiaje 1841]
Genus †Stenomerus de Vis 1907
Suborder Phalangeriformes Szalay 1982
Family Burramyidae Broom 1898 (pygmy possum)
Family Phalangeridae Thomas 1888 (cuscuses and allies)
Family †Pilkipildridae Archer, Tedford & Rich 1987
Genus †Djilgaringa Archer, Tedford & Rich 1987
Genus †Pilkipildra Archer, Tedford & Rich 1987
Family †Ektopodontidae Stirton, Tedford & Woodburne 1967
Genus †Chunia Woodburne & Clemens 1986
Genus †Darcius Rich 1986
Genus †Ektopodon Stirton, Tedford & Woodburne 1967
Family †Miralinidae Woodburn, Pledge & Archer 1987
Subfamily †Durudawirinae Crosby & Archer 2000
Genus †Durudawirini Crosby & Archer 2000
Subfamily †Miralininae Woodburn, Pledge & Archer 1987 sensu Crosby & Archer 2000
Genus †Barguru Schwartz 2006
Genus †Miralina Woodburn, Pledge & Archer 1987
Suborder Macropodiformes
Superfamily Petauroidea
Family Pseudocheiridae
Genus †Paljara Woodburne, Tedford & Archer 1987
Genus †Pildra Woodburne, Tedford & Archer 1987
Genus †Marlu Woodburne, Tedford & Archer 1987
Genus †Pseudokoala Turnbull & Lundelius 1970
Superfamily Macropodoidea Szalay 1987
Genus †Ekaltadeta Archer & Flannery 1985
Genus †Galanarla Flannery, Archer & Plane 1983
Genus †Nowidgee Cooke 1997
Genus †Purtia  Case 1984
Genus †Wakiewakie Woodburne 1984
Family †Palaeopotoroinae Flannery & Rich 1986
Genus †Palaeopotorous Flannery & Rich 1986
Family †Balbaridae Flannery, Archer & Plane 1983 sensu Kear et al. 2007
Genus †Nambaroo Kear et al. 2007
Genus †Wururoo Cooke 1997
Genus †Ganawamaya Cooke 1992
Genus †Balbaroo Flannery, Archer & Plane 1983
Family Hypsiprymnodontidae Collett 1887 sensu Kear et al. 2007 [Pleopodidae Owen 1878] (musky rat kangaroo)
Genus †Jackmahoneya Ride 1993
Genus †Propleopus Longman 1924 [Triclis de Vis 1888 non Loew 1851]
Family Potoroidae Gray 1821 [Bettongiinae Bensley 1903; Propleopodidae Archer & Flannery 1985]  (rat kangaroos)
Genus †Gumardee Flannery, Archer & Plane 1983
Genus †Milliyowi Flannery et al. 1992
Genus †Dorcopsoides Woodburne 1967
Genus †Kurrabi Flannery & Archer 1984
Genus †Watutia Flannery & Hoch 1989
Family Macropodidae Gray 1821 sensu Kear et al. 2007 [Halmaturidae Bonaparte 1831; Kangaroidae Gray 1858] (kangaroos and allies)
Genus †Ganguroo Kean, Archer & Flannery 2001
Genus †Wabularoo Archer 1979
Subfamily †Bulungamayinae Flannery, Archer & Plane 1983
Genus †Bulungamaya Flannery, Archer & Plane 1983
Genus †Cookeroo Butler et al. 2016
Subfamily †Sthenurinae Glauert 1926
Tribe Hadronomini
Genus †Hadronomas Woodburne 1967
Tribe Sthenurini Szalay 1994
Genus †Eosthenurus
Genus †Sthenurus Owen 1874a
Genus †Metasthenurus Prideaux 2004
Genus †Archaeosimos Prideaux 2004
Genus †Simosthenurus Tedford 1966
Genus †Procoptodon Owen 1874b [Pachysiagon Owen 1874; Pachysiagon Owen 1873 nomen nudum; Simosthenurus Tedford 1966]
Subfamily Macropodinae Gray 1821 [Protemnodontinae De Vis 1883]
Genus †Prionotemnus Stirton 1955
Genus †Congruus McNamara 1994
Genus †Synaptodon de Vis 1889 [Synaptodus Lydekker 1890]
Genus †Fissuridon Bartholomai 1973
Tribe Lagostrophini
Genus †Protemnodon Owen 1873
Genus †Troposodon Bartholomai 1967
Tribe Macropodini Gray 1821 [Halmaturini Goldfuss 1820]
Genus †Baringa Flannery & Hahn 1984
Genus †Bohra Flannery & Szalay 1982
Infraclass EutheriaBasal Eutheria
Genus †Beleutinus Bazhanov 1972 [nomen dubium] [?zalambdalestid or deltatheroid?]
Genus †Cretasorex Nesov & Gureyev 1981 [nomen dubium]
Genus †Eodesmatodon Zheng & Chi 1978
Genus †Eutrochodon Roth 1903
Genus †Helioseus Sudre 1979
Genus †Horolodectes Scott, Webb & Fox 2006
Genus †Hyotheridium Gregory & Simpson 1926
Genus †Idiogenomys Ostrander 1983
Genus †Neodesmostylus Khomenko 1928
Genus †Obtususdon Xu 1977
Genus †Prozalambdalestes
Genus †Sazlestes Nesov 1997
Genus †Telacodon Marsh 1892 [? Leptictida]
Genus †Tingamarra Godthelp et al. 1992
Genus †Wanotherium Tang & Yan 1976
Genus †Veratalpa Ameghino 1905 [?rodent, is based on an astragalus (Hutchison 1974)]
Eutheria incertae sedis
Genus †Acristatherium Hu et al. 2009
Genus †Juramaia Luo et al. 2011
Genus †Eomaia Ji et al. 2002
Genus †Prokennalestes Kielan-Jaworowska & Dashzeveg 1989
Genus †Murtoilestes Averianov & Skutschas 2001
Genus †Bobolestes Nesov 1985 [Otlestes Nesov 1985]
Genus †Montanalestes Cifelli 2000
Genus †Eozhelestes Nesov 1997
Genus †Paranyctoides Fox 1979 sensu Averianov & Archibald 2013 [Sailestes Nesov 1982]
Genus †Bulaklestes Nesov 1985
Genus †Uchkudukodon Archibald & Averianov 2006
Genus †Daulestes Trofimov & Nesov 1979
Genus †Maelestes
Family †Kulbeckiidae Nesov 1993
Genus †Kulbeckia Nesov 1993
Family †Ocepeiidae Gheerbrant et al. 2014
Genus †Ocepeia Gheerbrant & Sudre 2001
Family †Zalambdalestidae Gregory & Simpson 1926
Genus †Anchilestes Qiu & Li 1977 [?Esthonychidae]
Genus †Zhangolestes Zan et al. 2006
Genus †Alymlestes Averianov & Nesov 1995
Genus †Barunlestes Kielan-Jaworowska 1975
Genus †Zalambdalestes Gregory & Simpson 1926
Basal Ungulatomorpha
Genus †Borisodon Archibald & Averianov 2011
Genus †Mistralestes Tabuce et al. 2013
Genus †Sheikhdzheilia Averianov & Archibald 2005
Genus †Sorlestes Nesov 1985
Family †Lainodontinae Gheerbrant & Astibia 2012
Genus †Valentinella Tabuce, Vianey-Liaud & Garcia 2004
Genus †Labes Buscalioni et al. 1992
Genus †Lainodon Gheerbrant & Astibia 1994
Order †Asioryctitheria
Genus †Sasayamamylos Kusuhashi et al. 2013
Family †Kennalestidae Kielan-Jaworowska 1981
Genus †Kennalestes Kielan-Jaworowska 1969
Family †Asioryctitheriidae Szalay 1977 (nomen nudum) [Asioryctidae Kielan-Jaworowska 1981]
Genus †Ukhaatherium Novacek et al. 1997
Genus †Asioryctes Kielan-Jaworowska 1975
Order †Didelphodonta
Genus †Ilerdoryctes Marandat 1989
Genus †Naranius Russell & Dashzeveg 1986
Genus †Paleotomus Van Valen 1967 [Niphredil Van Valen 1978] [?palaeoryctid; Pantolestidae]
Genus †Puercolestes Reynolds 1936
Genus †Suratilestes Bajpai et al. 2005
Genus †Tinerhodon Gheerbrant 1995 [?Hyaenodontidae]
Family †Didelphodontidae Matthew 1918 [?palaeoryctid]
Genus †Didelphodus Cope 1882b [Didelphyodus Winge 1923; Phenacops Matthew 1909]
Genus †Avunculus Van Valen 1966
Genus †Acmeodon Matthew & Granger 1921
Genus †Gelastops Simpson 1935d [Emperodon Simpson 1935d]
Family †Cimolestidae Marsh 1889
Genus †Alveugena Eberle 1999
Genus †Maelestes Wible et al. 2007
Genus †Betonnia Williamson, Weil & Standhardt 2011
Genus †Chacopterygus Williamson, Weil & Standhardt 2011
Genus †Altacreodus Fox 2015
Genus †Ambilestes Fox 2015
Genus †Scollardius Fox 2015
Genus †Gallolestes Lillegraven 1976 [zhelestid?; Leptictida?]
Genus †Procerberus Sloan & Van Valen 1965
Genus †Telacodon Marsh 1892
Genus †Cimolestes Marsh 1889 [Nyssodon Simpson 1927; Puercolestes Reynolds 1936]
Order †Ptolemaiida
Family †Kelbidae Cote et al. 2007
Genus †Kelba Savage 1965 [Kenyalutra Schmidt-Kittler 1987; Ndamathaia Jacobs et al. 1987 sensu Morales et al. 2000]
Family †Ptolemaiidae Osborn 1908
Genus †Qarunavus Simons & Gingerich 1974
Genus †Cleopatrodon Bown & Simons 1987
Genus †Ptolemaia Osborn 1908 non McCutcheon & Wilson 1961
Order †Bibymalagasia
Family †Plesiorycteropodidae Patterson 1975 (?-1000 AD)
Genus †Plesiorycteropus Filhol 1895 [Myoryctes Forsyth Major 1908 non Ebert 1863; Majoria Thomas 1915 non]
Order Tubulidentata
Family Orycteropodidae (Gray 1821) Bonaparte 1850 (Aardvarks Eocene?–Recent)
Genus †Scotaeops Ameghino 1887
Genus †Palaeorycteropus Filhol 1893
Genus †Archaeorycteropus Ameghino 1905
Genus †Myorycteropus MacInnes 1956
Genus †Leptorycteropus Patterson 1975
Genus †Amphiorycteropus Lehmann 2009
Order Macroscelidea
Family Macroscelididae Bonaparte 1838 (elephant shrews)
Genus †Brevirhynchocyon Senut & Georgalis 2014 [Brachyrhynchocyon Senut 2008 non Scott & Jepsen 1936] (elephant shrew)
Subfamily †Herodotiinae Simons, Holroyd & Bown 1991
Genus †Nementchatherium Tabuce et al. 2001
Genus †Chambius Hartenberger 1986
Genus †Herodotius Simons, Holroyd & Bown 1991
Subfamily †Metoldobotinae Simons, Holroyd & Bown 1991
Genus †Metoldobotes Schlosser 1910
Subfamily Rhynchocyoninae Gill 1872
Genus †Miorhynchocyon Butler 1984
Subfamily †Mylomygalinae Patterson 1965
Genus †Mylomygale Broom & Schepers 1948
Subfamily †Myohyracinae Andrews 1914
Genus †Myohyrax Andrews 1914
Genus †Protypotheroides Stromer 1922
Subfamily Macroscelidinae Bonaparte 1838 [Macroscelinae]
Genus †Miosengi Grossman & Holroyd 2009
Genus †Pronasilio Butler 1984
Genus †Palaeothentoides Stromer 1932
Genus †Hiwegicyon Butler 1984
Order Afrosoricida
Family †Todralestidae Gheerbrant 1994 [?Pantolestinae]
Genus †Todralestes Gheerbrant 1991
Family †Adapisoriculidae Van Valen 1967
Genus †Adapisoriculus Lemoine 1885 [Nycticonodon Quinet 1964]
Genus †Bustylus Gheerbrant & Russell 1991
Genus †Proremiculus De Bast, Sigé & Smith 2012
Genus †Remiculus Russell 1964 [?Nyctitheriinae]
Suborder Tenrecomorpha Butler 1972 sensu Seiffert 2010
Genus †Garatherium Crochet 1984
Family †
Genus †Afrodon Gheerbrant 1988
Genus †Dilambdogale Seiffert 2010
Genus †Widanelfarasia Seiffert & Simons 2000
Family †Protenrecinae Butler 1969
Genus †Protenrec Butler & Hopwood 1957
Genus †Erythrozootes Butler & Hopwood 1957
Superfamily Chrysochloroidea Broom 1915
Family Chrysochloridae Gray 1825 (golden moles and relatives)
Genus †Eochrysochloris Seiffert et al. 2007
Subfamily †Prochrysochlorinae Butler 1984
Genus †Prochrysochloris Butler & Hopwood 1957
Subfamily Chrysochlorinae [Amblysominae Simonetta 1957; Eremitalpinae Simonetta 1957]
Genus †Proamblysomus Broom 1941
Superfamily Tenrecoidea Simpson 1931 [Zalambdodonta] (tenrecs and relatives)
Genus †Qatranilestes Seiffert 2010
Family Tenrecidae Gray 1821 [Centetidae] (tenrecs, Madagascar hedgehogs)
Subfamily Geogalinae Trouessart 1881 (large-eared tenrecs)
Genus †Parageogale Butler 1984 [Butleriella Poduschka & Poduschka 1985]
Subfamily †Protenrecinae Butler 1969
Genus †Protenrec Butler & Hopwood 1957
Genus †Erythrozootes Butler & Hopwood 1957
Order Hyracoidea
Oligocene–Recent

Genus †Antilohyrax Rasmussen & Simons 2000
Genus †Dimaitherium Barrow, Seiffert & Simons 2010
Genus †Hengduanshanhyrax Chen 2003
Genus †Namahyrax Pickford et al. 2008
Genus †Rukwalorax Stevens, O'Connor & Roberts 2009
Family Procaviidae Thomas 1892 [Hyracidae Gray 1821] (hyraxes)
Genus †Prohyrax Stromer 1926
Genus †Gigantohyrax Kitching 1965
Family †Pliohyracidae Osborn 1899
Genus †Brachyhyrax Pickford 2004
Genus †Seggeurius Crochet 1986
Genus †Microhyrax Sudre 1979
Subfamily †Geniohyinae Andrews 1906 non Matsumoto 1926
Genus †Geniohyus Andrews 1904a
Subfamily †Pliohyracinae Osborn 1899 non Matsumoto 1926
Genus †Sogdohyrax Dubrovo 1978
Genus †Kvabebihyrax Gabunia & Vekua 1966
Genus †Prohyrax Stromer 1926
Genus †Parapliohyrax Lavocat 1961
Genus †Pliohyrax Osborn 1899 [Leptodon Gaudry 1860 non Sundevall 1835; Neoschizotherium Viret 1947]
Genus †Postschizotherium von Koenigswald 1932
Subfamily †Saghatheriinae Andrews 1906 [Titanohyracinae Matsumoto 1926]
Genus †Meroehyrax Whitworth 1954
Genus †Bunohyrax Schlosser 1910
Genus †Pachyhyrax Schlosser 1910
Genus †Thyrohyrax Meyer 1973
Genus †Megalohyrax Andrews 1903 non Schlosser 1911 [Mixohyrax Schlosser 1910]
Genus †Selenohyrax Rasmussen & Simons 1988
Genus †Saghatherium Andrews & Beadnell 1902
Genus †Afrohyrax Pickford 2004
Genus †Antilohyrax Rasmussen & Simons 2000
Genus †Titanohyrax Matsumoto 1922 [Megalohyrax Schlosser 1911 non Andrews 1903]
Order Sirenia
Eocene–Recent

Genus †Priscosiren Velez-Juarbe & Domning 2014
Genus †Sirenotherium Paula Couto 1967
Genus †Anisosiren Kordos 1979
Genus †Indosiren von Koenigswald 1952
Genus †Miodugong Deraniyagala 1969
Genus †Paralitherium Kordos 1977
Genus †Sirenavus Kretzoi 1941
Family †Archaeosirenidae Abel 1914
Genus †Eosiren Andrews 1902 [Archaeosiren Abel 1913]
Family †Prorastomidae Cope 1889
Genus †Pezosiren Domning 2001
Genus †Prorastomus Owen 1855
Family †Protosirenidae Sickenberg 1934
Genus †Ashokia Bajpai et al. 2009
Genus †Protosiren Abel 1907
Family †Eotheroididae Kretzoi 1941
Genus †Eotheroides Trouessart 1905 [Eotherium Owen 1875 non Leidy 1853; Masrisiren Kretzoi 1941]
Family †Prototheriidae Kretzoi 1941
Genus †Prototherium de Zigno 1887 [Mesosiren Abel 1906; Paraliosiren Abel 1906]
Family †Halitheriidae Gill 1872
Genus †Halitherium Kaup 1855 [Pugmeodon Kaup 1838]
Family Trichechidae Gill 1871 [Manatidae Gray 1821] (manatees)
Subfamily Miosireninae Abel 1919
Genus †Prohalicore Flot 1887
Genus †Anomotherium Siegfried 1965
Genus †Miosiren Dollo 1889
Subfamily Trichechinae Gill 1872 [Halicorea Brandt 1846; Halicoreae Brandt 1833; Manatida Brandt 1868; Manatidae; Manatoidea Gill 1872; Trichechoidea Gill 1872]
Genus †Potamosiren Reinhart 1951
Genus †Ribodon Ameghino 1883
Family Dugongidae (Gray 1821) Simpson 1932 [Halicoridae Gray 1825] (sea cows)
Genus †Caribosiren Reinhard 1959
Subfamily Metaxytheriinae Kretzoi 1941 [Halinassinae Reinhart 1959]
Genus †Metaxytherium de Christol 1840 [Cheirotherium Bruno 1839 non Kaup 1835; Felsinotherium Capellini 1872; Fucotherium Kaup 1840; Halianassa von Meyer 1838; Halysiren Kretzoi 1941; Haplosiren Kretzoi 1951; Hesperosiren Simpson 1932; Pontotherium Kaup 1840]
Subfamily Hydrodamalinae (Palmer 1895) sensu Simpson 1932 Rytinidae Girard 1852] (North Pacific sea cows)
Genus †Dusisiren Domning 1978
Genus †Hydrodamalis Retzius 1794 [Dystomus Fischer von Waldheim 1813; Haligyna Billberg 1827; Manati Steller 1774; Nepus Fischer von Waldheim 1814; Rhytina Berthold 1827; Sirene Link 1794; Stellerus Desmarest 1822]
Subfamily Dugonginae (Gray 1821) Simpson 1932 [Halicorinae Abel 1913; Rhytiodinae Abel 1914; Rytiodontinae Kretzoi 1941; Thelriopiinae Pilleri 1987] (dugongs)
Genus †Callistosiren Velez-Juarbe & Domning 2015
Genus †Nanosiren Domning & Aguilera 2008
Genus †Domningia Thewissen & Bajpai 2009
Genus †Kutchisiren Bajpai et al. 2010
Genus †Crenatosiren Domning 1991
Genus †Bharatisiren Bajpai & Domning 1997
Genus †Corystosiren Domning 1990
Genus †Rytiodus Lartet 1866
Genus †Dioplotherium Cope 1883
Genus †Xenosiren Domning 1989
Order †Embrithopoda
Eocene-Oligocene

Genus †Namatherium Pickford et al. 2008
Genus †Radinskya McKenna et al. 1989
Genus †Heptoconodon Zdansky 1930 [?Lunania Chow 1957 non Hooker]
Family †Arsinoitheriidae Andrews 1904
Genus †Arsinoitherium Beadnell 1902
Family †Palaeoamasiidae Şen & Heintz 1979
Genus †Hypsamasia Maas, Thewissen & Kappelman 1998
Genus †Palaeoamasia Ozansoy 1966 [Palaeoamasia Sen & Heintz 1979 nomen dubious]
Genus †Crivadiatherium Radulesco, Iliesco & Iliesco 1976 [nomen dubious]
Order †Desmostylia
Family †Desmostylidae Osborn 1905 [Cornwallidae Shikama 1957; Paleoparadoxiidae Reinhart 1953] (Miocene–Pliocene)
Genus †Ounalashkastylus Chiba et al. 2015
Genus †Seuku Beatty & Cockburn 2015
Genus †Jamilcotatus Aranda-Manteca & Barnes 1998 [nomen nudum]
Genus †Vanderhoofius Reinhart 1959
Genus †Ashoroa Inuzuka 2000
Subfamily Behemotopsinae Inuzuka 1987
Genus †Behemotops Domning, Ray & McKenna 1986
Subfamily Cornwalliinae Shikama 1957
Genus †Cornwallius Hay 1923
Subfamily Desmostylinae
Genus †Desmostylus Marsh 1888 [Desmostylella Nagao 1937; Kronokotherium Pronina 1957]
Subfamily Paleoparadoxiinae (Reinhart 1959) Barnes 2013
Genus †Archaeoparadoxia Barnes 2013
Genus †Paleoparadoxia Reinhart 1959
Genus †Neoparadoxia Barnes 2013
Order Proboscidea
Eocene–Holocene

Genus †Daouitherium Gheerbrant & Sudre 2002
Genus †Phosphatherium Gheerbrant, Sudre & Cappetta 1996
Genus †Arcanotherium Delmer 2009
Family †Moeritheriidae Andrews 1906
Genus †Moeritherium Andrews 1901
Suborder †Barytherioidea Andrews 1906
Family †Numidotheriidae Shoshani & Tassy 1992
Genus †Numidotherium Jaeger 1986
Family †Barytheriidae Andrews 1906
Genus †Barytherium Andrews 1901 [Bradytherium Andrews 1901 non Grandidier 1901]
Family †Deinotheriidae Bonaparte 1845 sensu Sanders, Kappelman & Rasmussen 2004
Subfamily †Chilgatheriinae Sanders, Kappelman & Rasmussen 2004
Genus †Chilgatherium Sanders, Kappelman & Rasmussen 2004
Subfamily †Deinotheriinae Bonaparte 1845 (Sanders, Kappelman & Rasmussen 2004 nom. transl. pro Deinotheriidae Bonaparte 1845)
Genus †Prodeinotherium Ehik 1930
Genus †Deinotherium Kaup 1829
Suborder Elephantiformes Tassy 1988
Genus †Eritreum Shoshani et al. 2006
Family †Palaeomastodontidae Andrews 1906
Genus †Palaeomastodon Andrews 1901
Family †Phiomiidae Kalandadze & Rautian 1992
Genus †Phiomia Andrews & Beadnell 1902
Family †Hemimastodontidae McKenna et al. 1997
Genus †Hemimastodon Pilgrim 1912
Infraorder †Mammuthida Tassy & Shoshani 1997
Family †Mammutidae Hay 1922 non Cabrera 1929
Subfamily †Eozygodontinae McKenna, Bell & Shoshani 1997
Genus †Eozygodon Tassy & Pickford 1983
Subfamily †Mammutinae Hay 1922 [Mastodontinae Bonaparte 1845; Zyglophodontinae Osborn 1923]
Genus †Losodokodon Rasmussen & Gutiérrez 2009
Genus †Zygolophodon Vacek 1877 [Turicius Osborn 1926; Mastolophodon Chakravarti 1957]
Genus †Miomastodon Osborn, 1922
Genus †Mammut Blumenbach 1799 [Harpagmotherium Fischer De Waldheim 1808; Mastodon Rafinesque 1814; Mastotherium Fischer De Waldheim 1809; Mastodontum de Blainville 1817; Tetracaulodon Godman 1830; Missourium Koch 1840; Leviathan Koch 1841; Pliomastodon Osborn 1926]
Infraorder Elephantida Tassy & Shoshani 1997
Genus †"Konobelodon" atticus (Wagner 1857) Konidaris et al. 2014
Genus †"Bunolophodon" grandidens
Genus †Morrillia Osborn 1924
Genus †Paratetralophodon Tassy 1983
Family †Choerolophodontinae Gaziry 1976
Genus †Afrochoerodon Pickford 2001
Genus †Choerolophodon Schlessinger 1917[Synconolophus Osborn 1929]
Family †Amebelodontidae Barbour 1927 [Platybelodontinae Borissiak 1928; Protanancinae McKenna, Bell & Shoshani 1997]
Genus †Afromastodon Pickford 2003
Genus †Progomphotherium Pickford 2003
Genus †Archaeobelodon Tassy 1984
Genus †Serbelodon Frick 1933
Genus †Protanancus Arambourg 1945
Genus †Amebelodon Barbour 1927
Genus †Konobelodon Lambert 1990
Genus †Platybelodon Borissiak 1928 [Torynobelodon Barbour 1929; Selenolophodon Chang & Zhai 1978]
Family †Gomphotheriidae Hay 1922 sensu stricto [Trilophodontinae Simpson 1931; Longirostrinae Osborn 1918; Serridentinae Osborn 1921]
Genus †Gomphotherium Burmeister 1837 [Trilophodon Falconer & Cautley 1846; Bunolophodon Vacek 1877; Tetrabelodon Cope 1884; Megabelodon Barbour 1914; Genomastodon Barbour 1917; Serridentinus Osborn 1923; Ocalientinus Frick 1933; Trobelodon Frick 1933; Tatabelodon Frick 1933; Hemilophodon Kretzoi 1942; Kunatia Sarwar & Akhtar 1992]
Family †Gnathabelodontinae-Cuvieroniinae clade [Bunomastodontidae Osborn 1921]
Genus †Sinomastodon Tobien, Chen & Li 1986
Genus †Eubelodon Barbour 1914
Subfamily †Rhynchotheriinae Hay 1922 [Rhynchorostrinae Osborn 1918]
Genus †Rhynchotherium Falconer 1868 [Dibelodon Cope 1885; Blickotherium Frick 1933; Aybelodon Frick 1933]
Subfamily †Gnathabelodontinae Barbour & Sternberg 1835
Genus †Gnathabelodon Barbour & Sternberg 1935
Subfamily †Cuvieroniinae [Notorostrinae Osborn 1921; Humboltinae Osborn 1934; Brevirostrinae Osborn 1918; Notiomastodontinae Osborn 1936; Stegomastodontinae Osborn 1936]
Genus †Amahuacatherium Romero-Pittman 1996
Genus †Stegomastodon Pohlig 1912 [Rhabdobunus Ray 1914]
Genus †Haplomastodon Hoffstetter 1950 [Aleamastodon Hoffstetter 1952]
Genus †Notiomastodon Cabrera 1929
Genus †Cuvieronius Osborn 1923 [Mastodon; Cordillerion Osborn 1926; Teleobunomastodon Revilliod 1931]
Family Elephantidae Gray 1821 (modern elephants)
Genus †Stegodibelodon Coppens 1972
Subfamily †Stegolophodontinae Osborn 1936
Genus †Stegolophodon Schlesinger 1917 non Pohlig 1888 [Prostegodon Matsumoto 1923; Eostegodon Yabe 1950; Tetrazygodon Tobien 1978; Antelephas Sarwar 1979; Rulengchia Zhou & Zhang 1983]
Subfamily †Stegotetrabelodontinae Aguirre 1969
Genus †Stegotetrabelodon Patrocchi 1941
Subfamily †Stegodontinae Osborn 1918 [Cryptomastodontidae Von Koenigswals 1933]
Genus †Stegodon Falconer 1847 [Stegolophodon Pohlig 1888 non Schlesinger 1917; Emmenodon Cope 1889; Parastegodon Matsumoto 1929; Cryptomastodon von Koenigswald 1933; Platystegodon Deraniyagala 1954; Sulcicephalus Deraniyagala 1954]
Subfamily †Elephantinae Gray 1821 [Dicyclotheriinae Deraniyagala 1955] (modern elephants)
Genus †Primelephas Maglio 1970
Genus †Mammuthus Brookes 1828 [Dicyclotherium St. Hilare 1837; Cheirolites von Meyer 1848; Mammonteum De Blainville 1864; Archidiskodon Pohlig 1888; Parelephas Osborn 1925; Metarchidiskodon Osborn 1934] (mammuts)
Order †Leptictida
Family †Gypsonictopidae Van Valen 1967
Genus †Gypsonictops Simpson 1927 [Euangelistes Simpson 1929]
Family †Didymoconidae Kretzoi 1943 [Tshelkariidae Gromova 1960]
Genus †Zeuctherium Tang & Yan 1976
Genus †Archaeoryctes Zheng 1979
Genus †Hunanictis Li et al. 1979
Genus †Kennatherium Mallett & Szalay 1968
Genus †Ardynictis Matthew & Granger 1925
Genus †Didymoconus Matthew & Granger 1924 [Tshelkaria Gromova 1960]
Family †Leptictidae Gill 1872 [Isacidae Cope 1874; Ictopsidae Schlosser 1887; Ictopsida Haeckel 1895]
Subfamily †Pseudorhyncocyoninae Sigé 1974 [Pseudorhyncocyonidae Storch & Lister 1985]
Genus †Diaphyodectes Russell 1964
Genus †Phakodon Hooker 2013
Genus †Pseudorhyncocyon Filhol 1892
Genus †Leptictidium Tobien 1962
Subfamily †Leptictinae Gill 1872 non Van Valen 1967 [Diacodontinae Trouessart 1879]
Genus †Amphigyion Gingerich & Smith 2006
Genus †Megaleptictis Meehan & Martin 2012
Genus †Myrmecoboides Gidley 1915
Genus †Ongghonia Kellner & McKenna 1996
Genus †Blacktops Meehan & Martin 2010
Genus †Ictopidium Zdansky 1930 [?Erinaceidae: Tupaiodontinae Butler 1988]
Genus †Xenacodon Matthew & Granger 1921
Genus †Protictops Peterson 1934 [?Geolabididae]
Genus †Leptictis Leidy 1868 [Isacus Cope 1873 non Isaca Walker 1857; Mesodectes Cope 1875; Ictops Leidy 1868; Nanohyus Leidy 1869; Ictidops Weber 1904]
Genus †Prodiacodon Matthew 1929 [Palaeolestes Matthew 1918 non De Vis 1911]
Genus †Palaeictops Matthew 1899 [Parictops Granger 1910; Hypictops Gazin 1949]
Order †Cimolesta
Family †Wyolestidae Gingerich 1981
Genus †Wyolestes Gingerich 1981
Genus †Hsiangolestes Zheng & Huang 1984
Genus †Mongoloryctes Van Valen 1966
Family †Palaeoryctidae Winge 1917
Genus †Ottoryctes Bloch, Secord & Gingerich 2004
Genus †Aaptoryctes Gingerich 1982
Genus †Aceroryctes Rankin & Holroyd 2014
Genus †Aboletylestes Russell 1964 [?cimolestid; Didelphodonta]
Genus †Eoryctes Thewissen & Gingerich 1989 non Romer 1966 (nomen nudum)
Genus †Lainoryctes Fox 2004
Genus †Leptonysson Van Valen 1967 [a leptictid or a pantolestid?]
Genus †Naranius Russell & Dashzeveg 1986
Genus †Tsaganius Russell & Dashzeveg 1986 [?Didelphodonta]
Genus †Palaeoryctes Matthew 1913
Genus †Pararyctes Van Valen 1966
Suborder †Ernodonta Ding 1987
Family †Ernanodontidae Ding 1979
Genus †Asiabradypus Nesov 1987
Genus †Ernanodon Ding 1979
Suborder †Apatotheria Scott & Jepsen 1936
Family †Apatemyidae Matthew 1909
Subfamily †Unuchiinae Van Valen 1966
Genus †Unuchinia Simpson 1937 [Apator Simpson 1937 non Semenow 1898]
Subfamily †Apatemyinae Matthew 1909
Genus †Carcinella Von Koenigswald et al. 2009
Genus †Eochiromys Teilhard de Chardin 1927
Genus †Frugivastodon Bajpai et al. 2005
Genus †Heterohyus Gervais 1848 [Necrosorex Filhol 1890; Heterochiromys Stehlin 1916; Amphichiromys Stehlin 1916; Gardomys Sigé 1975; Chardinyus Sigé 1975; Gervaisyus Sigé 1990]
Genus †Sinclairella Jepsen 1934
Genus †Jepsenella Simpson 1940
Genus †Labidolemur Matthew & Granger 1921
Genus †Apatemys Marsh 1872 [Stehlinius Matthew 1921]
Suborder †Taeniodonta Cope 1876
Family †StylinodontidaeMarsh 1875a
Genus †Chungchienia Chow 1963 [? tillodont by McKenna & Bell 1997]
Genus †Alveugena Eberle 1999 sensu Alroy 2002
Genus †Onychodectes Coep 1888
Subfamily †Conoryctinae Wortman 1896
Genus †Conoryctella Gazin 1939
Genus †Huerfanodon Schoch & Lucas 1981b
Genus †Conoryctes Cope 1881 [Hexodon Cope 1884 non Olivier 1789]
Subfamily †Stylinodontinae Schlosser 1911
Genus †Schowalteria Fox & Naylor 2003
Genus †Schochia Lucas & Williamson 1993
Genus †Wortmania Hay 1899
Genus †Psittacotherium Cope 1882 [Hemiganus Cope 1882 non Hemicanus Wortman 1897]
Genus †Ectoganus Cope 1874 [Camalodon Cope 1874; Dryptodon Marsh 1876; Conicodon Cope 1894; Lampadophorus Patterson 1949]
Genus †Stylinodon Marsh 1874b
Suborder †Tillodontia Marsh 1875
Family †Tillotheriidae Marsh 1875 [Esthonychidae]
Subfamily †Deltatheriinae Van Valen 1988 [?Leptictidae]
Genus †Deltatherium Cope 1881 [Lipodectes Cope 1881]
Subfamily †Tillotheriinae Marsh 1875 [Plethorodontidae Huang & Zheng 1987]
Genus †Anchilestes Chiu & Li 1977 [? anagalid]
Genus †Basalina Dehm & Oettingen-Spielberg 1958
Genus †Benaius Wang & Jin 2004
Genus †Franchaius Baudry 1992
Genus †Higotherium Miyata & Tomida 1998
Genus †Kuanchuanius Chow 1963
Genus †Simplodon Huang & Zheng 2003
Genus †Interogale Huang & Zheng 1983 [?Anagalida]
Genus †Plethorodon Huang & Zheng 1987
Genus †Yuesthonyx Tong, Wang & Fu 2003
Genus †Lofochaius Chow et al. 1973
Genus †Meiostylodon Wang 1975
Tribe †Esthonychini [Trogosinae]
Genus †Adapidium Young 1937
Genus †Anthraconyx Rose et al. 2012
Genus †Megalesthonyx Rose 1972
Genus †Esthonyx Cope 1874 [Plesiesthonyx Lemoine 1891; Azygonyx Gingerich 1989]
Genus †Tillodon Gazin 1953 [Tillotherium Marsh 1875]
Genus †Trogosus Leidy 1871b [Anchippodus Leidy 1868 (nomen nudum)]
Suborder †Pantodonta Cope 1873
Genus †Huananius Huang & Zheng 1999
Family †Wangliidae Van Valen 1988 [Alcidedorbignyidae de Muizon & Marshall 1992]
Genus †Alcidedorbignya de Muizon & Marshall 1987
Genus †Wanglia Van Valen 1988 [Harpyodus de Muizon & Marshall 1992]
Superfamily †Bemalambdoidea Zhou, Zhang, Wang & Ding 1973
Family †Bemalambdidae Zhou et al. 1973
Genus †Bemalambda Zhou et al. Ding 1973
Genus †Hypsilolambda Wang 1975
Family †Harpyodidae Wang 1979
Genus †Harpyodus Qiu & Li 1977
Genus †Dysnoetodon Zhang 1980 [?Tillotheriinae]
Superfamily †Coryphodontoidea Marsh 1876
Family †Coryphodontidae Marsh 1876
Genus †Asiocoryphodon Xu 1976
Genus †Coryphodon Owen 1845 [Bathmodon Cope 1872; Metalophodon Cope 1872; Ectacodon Cope 1882; Manteodon Cope 1882; Letalophodon; Loxolophodon Cope 1872]
Genus †Heterocoryphodon Lucas & Tong 1987
Genus †Eudinoceras Osborn 1924
Genus †Hypercoryphodon Osborn & Granger 1932
Genus †Metacoryphodon Zhou & Qi 1982 non Qi 1987
Genus †Procoryphodon Flerow 1957
Superfamily †Pantolambdoidea Cope 1883
Family †Cyriacotheriidae Rose & Krause 1982
Genus †Cyriacotherium Rose & Krause 1982 [Sabatherium McKenna 1972]
Genus †Presbytherium Scott 2010
Family †Pastoralodontidae Chow & Qi 1978
Genus †Altilambda Chow & Wang 1978
Genus †Pastoralodon Chow & Qi 1978 [Convallisodon Chow & Qi 1978]
Family †Titanoideidae Patterson 1934
Genus †Titanoides Gidley 1917 [Sparactolambda Patterson 1939]
Family †Barylambdidae Patterson 1937
Genus †Barylambda Patterson 1937 [Leptolambda Patterson & Simons 1958 sensu McKenna & Bell 1997]
Genus †Haplolambda Patterson 1939 [Ignatiolambda Simons 1960]
Family †Pantolambdidae Cope 1883
Genus †Caenolambda Gazin 1956
Genus †Guilielmofloweria Ameghino 1901
Genus †Lopholambda Ameghino 1904
Genus †Pantolambda Cope 1882
Family †Pantolambdodontidae Granger & Gregory 1934 [Archaeolambdidae Flerov 1952]
Genus †Archaeolambda Flerov 1952 [Dilambda Tong 1978; Oroklambda Dashzeveg 1980]
Genus †Guichilambda Huang & Chen 1997
Genus †Nanlingilambda Tong 1979
Genus †Pantolambdodon Granger & Gregory 1934
Suborder †Pantolesta McKenna 1975
Genus †Gobiopithecus Dashzeveg & Russel 1992
Genus †Premontrelestes Smith 2001
Genus †Simidectes Stock 1933 [Pleurocyon Peterson 1919 non Mercerat 1917; Sespecyon Stock 1933 (nomen nudum); Petersonella Kraglievich 1948 (nomen novii)]
Family †Paroxyclaenidae Weintzel 1933
Genus †Dulcidon van Valen 1965 [a dichobunid??]
Subfamily †Merialinae Russell & Godinot 1988
Genus †Merialus Russell & Godinot 1988
Genus †Euhookeria Russell & Godinot 1988
Subfamily †Paroxyclaeninae Weitzel 1933
Genus †Kiinkerishella Gabunia & Birjukov 1978
Genus †Paroxyclaenus Teilhard de Chardin 1922
Genus †Spaniella Crusafont Pairó & Russell 1967
Genus †Vulpavoides Matthes 1952 [Pugiodens Matthes 1952; Russellites Van Valen 1965]
Genus †Kopidodon Weitzel 1933
Family †Pantolestidae Cope 1884 [Dyspternidae Kretzoi 1943]
Genus †Aatotomus Rankin 2014
Subfamily †Pentacodontinae Simpson 1937
Genus †Aphronorus Simpson 1935
Genus †Bisonalveus Gazin 1956
Genus †Coriphagus Douglass 1908 [Mixoclaenus Matthew & Granger 1921]
Genus †Pantomimus Van Valen 1967
Genus †Pentacodon Scott 1892
Genus †Protentomodon Simpson 1928a [?palaeoryctid; Didelphodontia]
Genus †Amaramnis Gazin 1962
Subfamily †Dyspterninae Kretzoi 1943 [Kochictidae Kretzoi 1943]
Genus †Fordonia Marandat 1989 non Gray 1842
Genus †Cryptopithecus Schlosser 1890 [Opsiclaenodon Butler 1946; Androconus Quinet 1965]
Genus †Dyspterna Hopwood 1927
Genus †Kochictis Kretzoi 1943
Genus †Gobipithecus Dashzeveg & Russell 1992
Subfamily †Todralestinae Gheerbrant 1991
Genus †Todralestes Gheerbrant 1991
Genus †Namalestes Pickford et al. 2008
Subfamily †Pantolestinae Cope 1884 [Cymaprimadontidae Clark 1968]
Genus †Nosella Pelaez-Campomanes 1999
Genus †Propalaeosinopa Simpson 1927 nomen dubium
Genus †Bessoecetor Simpson 1936 sensu Scott, Fox & Youzwyshyn 2002
Genus †Palaeosinopa Matthew 1901 [Niphredil van Valen 1978]
Genus †Thelysia Gingerich 1982
Genus †Pagonomus Russell 1964
Genus †Pantolestes Cope 1872b [Passalacodon Marsh 1872; Anisacodon Marsh 1872]
Genus †Bogdia Dashzeveg & Russell 1985
Genus †Chadronia Cook 1954 [Cymaprimadon Clark 1968]
Genus †Buxolestes Jaeger 1970
Genus †Bouffinomus Mathis 1989
Genus †Galethylax Gervais 1850
Genus †Oboia Gabunia 1989 [? merialine paroxyclaenid]
Genus †Zhigdenia Lopatin 2006
Order Eulipotyphla
Late Cretaceous–Recent

Family †Micropternodontidae sensu McKenna & Bell 1997
Family †Diacodontinae
Family †Creotarsidae
Family †Sespedectidae
Family †Amphilemuridae Hill 1953
Family †Adapisoricidae
Superfamily Erinaceoidea
Family Erinaceidae Fischer de Waldheim 1817
Superfamily Talpoidea
Genus †Hesperoscalops Hibbard 1941
Family †Proscalopidae Reed 1961
Family †Dimylidae
Family Talpidae Fischer von Waldheim 1817
Family †Geolabididae
Superfamily Soricoidea
Family †Apternodontidae
Family †Oligoryctidae Asher et al. 2002
Family †Parapternodontidae Asher et al. 2002
Family †Nyctitheriidae Simpson 1928a
Family Soricidae Fischer von Waldheim 1817
Genus †Dolinasorex Rofes & Cuence-Bescós, 2008
Species †Dolinasorex glyphodon Rofes & Cuence-Bescós, 2008
Genus Notiosorex Coues 1877
Species †Notiosorex harrisi Carroway 2010
Order Dermoptera
Paleocene–Recent

Family †Thylacaelurinae Van Valen 1967
Genus †Thylacaelurus Russell 1954
Family †Plagiomenidae Matthew 1918
Genus †Eudaemonema Simpson 1935
Genus †Elpidophorus Simpson 1927
Subfamily †Plagiomeninae Matthew & Granger 1918
Tribe †Worlandiini Bown & Rose 1979
Genus †Planetetherium Simpson 1928
Genus †Worlandia Bown & Rose 1979
Tribe †Plagiomenini
Genus †Ellesmene Dawson et al. 1993
Genus †Plagiomene Matthew 1918
Family †Mixodectidae Cope 1883 [Oldobotidae Schlosser 1907]
Genus †Dracontolestes Gazin 1941
Genus †Mixodectes Cope 1883 [Indrodon Cope 1884; Olbodotes Osborn 1902]
Family Cynocephalidae Simpson 1945 [Colugidae Miller 1906; Galeopithecidae Gray 1821; Galeopteridae Thomas 1908; Pleuropteridae Burnett 1829; Pterocebineae Lesson 1840]
Genus †Progaleopithecus Ameghino 1904
Genus †Dermotherium Durcrocq et al. 1992
Genus †Cynocephalus Boddaert 1768 non St. Hilaire  & Cuvier 1795 non Swainson 1835 [Colugo Gray 1870; Dermopterus Burnett 1829; Galeolemur Lesson 1840; Galeopithecus Pallas 1783; Galeopus Rafinesque 1815; Pleuropterus Burnett 1829] (Philippine flying lemur)
Genus †Galeopterus Thomas 1908 (Cobego, Sunda/Malayan Flying Lemur)
Order Chiroptera
Eocene–Recent

Genus †Australonycteris Hand et al. 1994
Family †Onychonycteridae
Family †Icaronycteridae Jepsen 1966
Family †Archaeonycteridae Revilliod 1917
Family †Hassianycterididae Habersetzer & Storch 1987
Family †Tanzanycterididae
Family †Palaeochiropterygidae Revilliod 1917
Family Pteropodidae Gray 1821 [Cephalotidae Gray 1821] (Old World fruit bats, flying foxes)
Family Megadermatidae Allen 1864 (Asian false vampire bats)
Family Rhinopomatidae Bonaparte 1838 (mouse-tailed/long-tailed bats)
Family Rhinolophidae Gray 1825 [Hipposideridae] (horseshoe bats)
Family Phyllostomatidae Gray 1825 [Desmodontidae] (American leaf-nosed bats)
Family Mystacinidae Dobson 1875 (New Zealand short-tailed bats)
Family †Philisidae Sige 1985
Family Molossidae Gray 1821 (free-tailed bats & mastiff bats)
Family Emballonuridae Gervais 1855 (Sac-winged bats, sheath-tailed & ghost bats)
Family Myzopodidae Thomas 1904
Family Natalidae Gray 1866 (funnel-eared/tall-crowned/graceful bats)
Family Vespertilionidae Gray 1821
Order Scandentia
Genus †Nycticonodon Quinet 1964
Family Tupaiidae Gray 1825 (tree shrews)
Subfamily Tupaiinae Gray 1825 [Cladobatina Bonaparte 1838; Glisoricina Pomel 1848] (true tree shrews)
Genus †Palaeotupaia Chopra & Vasishat 1979
Genus †Eodendrogale Yongsheng 1988 non Tong 1988
Genus †Prodendrogale Qiu 1986
Order †Plesiadapiformes
Genus †Pandemonium Van Valen 1994
Family †Palaechthonidae Szalay 1969
Genus †Palaechthon Gidley 1923
Family †Purgatoriidae (Van Valen & Sloan 1965) Gunnell 1981
Genus †Ursolestes Fox, Scott & Buckley 2014
Genus †Purgatorius Van Valen & Sloan 1965
Family †Palaechthonidae van Valen 1995
Genus †Anasazia Van Valen 1994
Subfamily †Palenochthina
Genus †Premnoides Gunnell 1989
Genus †Palenochtha Simpson 1935
Subfamily †Plesiolestinae Gunnell 1989
Genus †Phoxomylus Fox 2011
Genus †Plesiolestes Jepsen 1930 [Talpohenach Kay & Cartmill 1977]
Genus †Torrejonia Gazin 1968
Family †Micromomyidae Szalay 1974
Genus †Dryomomys Bloch et al. 2007
Subfamily †Tinimomyinae Beard & Houde 1989 sensu McKenna & Bell 1997
Genus †Tinimomys Szalay 1974 [Myrmekomomys Robinson 1994]
Subfamily †Micromomyinae
Genus †Chalicomomys Beard & Houde 1989
Genus †Micromomys Szalay 1973
Family †Picrodontidae Simpson 1937
Genus †Draconodus Tomida 1982
Genus †Zanycteris Matthew 1917
Genus †Picrodus Douglass 1908 [Megapterna Douglass 1908]
Family †Picromomyidae Rose & Bown 1996
Genus †Picromomys Rose & Bown 1996
Genus †Alveojunctus Bown 1982
Family †Toliapinidae Hooker, Russell & Phélizon 1999
Genus †Seia Russell & Gingerich 1981 [formerly an erinaceomorph insectivoran]
Genus †Berruvius Russell 1964 [?navajoviine sensu McKenna & Bell 1997]
Genus †Sarnacius Hooker, Russell & Phélizon 1999
Genus †Altiatlasius Sigé et al. 1990 [formerly an omomyid primate]
Genus †Avenius Russell, Phélizon & Louis 1992
Genus †Toliapina Hooker, Russell & Phélizon 1999
Family †Microsyopidae Osborn & Wortman 1892
Subfamily †Microsyopinae (Osborn & Wortman 1892) Matthew 1915
Genus †Arctodontomys Gunnell 1985
Genus †Megadelphus Gunnell 1989
Genus †Craseops Stock 1932
Genus †Microsyops Leidy 1872 [Bathrodon Marsh 1872; Mesacodon Marsh 1872; Palaeacodon Leidy 1872; Cynodontomys Cope 1882]
Subfamily †Uintasoricinae Szalay 1969 [Navajoviinae Gunnell 1989]
Genus †Alveojunctus Bown 1982
Genus †Choctawius Beard & Dawson 2009
Tribe †Navajoviini Szalay & Delson 1979
Genus †Navajovius Matthew & Granger 1921
Tribe †Uintasoricini Szalay 1969
Genus †Niptomomys McKenna 1960
Genus †Nanomomys Rose et al. 2012
Genus †Bartelsia Gunnell 2012
Genus †Uintasorex Matthew 1909b
Family †Paromomyidae Simpson 1940
Genus †Edworthia Fox, Scott & Rankin 2010
Genus †Paromomys Gidley 1923 {Paromomyinae}
Genus †Acidomomys Bloch et al. 2002
Subfamily †Phenacolemurinae Simpson 1955 [Simpsonlemurini Robinson & Ivy 1994; Phenacolemurini Simpson 1955]
Genus †Pulverflumen Robinson & Ivy 1994
Genus †Simpsonlemur Robinson & Ivy 1994
Genus †Dillerlemur Robinson & Ivy 1994
Genus †Ignacius Matthew & Granger 1921
Genus †Phenacolemur Matthew 1915
Genus †Elwynella Rose & Bown 1982
Genus †Arcius Godinot 1984
Family †Chronolestidae
Genus †Chronolestes Beard & Wang 1995
Family Plesiadapidae
Genus †Jattadectes Thewissen, Williams & Hussain 2001
Subfamily †Saxonellinae Russell 1964 sensu McKenna & Bell 1997 [Saxonellidae Russell 1964]
Genus †Saxonella Russell 1964
Subfamily †Plesiadapinae Troussart 1897
Genus †Megachiromyoides Weigelt 1933
Genus †Pronothodectes Gidley 1923
Genus †Nannodectes Gingerich 1975
Genus †Chiromyoides Stehlin 1916
Genus †Platychoerops Charlesworth 1855 [Miolophus Owen 1865; Subunicuspidens Lemoine 1887]
Genus †Plesiadapis Gervais 1877 sensu stricto non Russell 1964/Jepsen 1930 [Tricuspidens Lemoine 1887; Nothodectes Matthew 1915; Menatotherium Piton 1940; Ancepsoides Russell 1964]
Family Carpolestidae Simpson 1935
Genus †Parvocristes Thewissen, Williams & Hussain 2001
Genus †Subengius Smith, VanItterbeeck & Missiaen 2004
Subfamily †Carpolestinae Simpson 1935
Genus †Elphidotarsius Gidley 1923
Genus †Carpocristes Beard & Wang 1995
Genus †Carpodaptes Matthew & Granger 1921
Genus †Carpolestes Simpson 1928 sensu lato [Litotherium Simpson 1929; Carpomegodon Bloch et al. 2001]
Order Primates
List of fossil primates
Order †Anagalida
Genus †Wania Wang 1995
Family †Pseudictopidae Sulimski 1969 [Mingotheriidae Schoch 1985]
Genus †Anictops Qiu 1977
Genus †Cartictops Ding & Tong 1979
Genus †Paranictops Qiu 1977
Genus †Allictops Qiu 1977
Genus †Pseudictops Matthew, Granger & Simpson 1929
Genus †Mingotherium Schoch 1985 [Uintatheriamorpha?]
Genus †Halticotops Ding & Tong 1979
Family †Anagalidae Simpson 1931 [Peritupaioidea Crusafont Pairó 1966]
Genus †Linnania Chow et al. 1973
Genus †Diacronus Xu 1976
Genus †Huaiyangale Xu 1976
Genus †Palasiodon Tong et al. 1976 [?Mioclaeninae; Hyopsodontinae]
Genus †Eosigale Hu 1993
Genus †Wanogale Xu 1976
Genus †Anaptogale Xu 1976
Genus †Stenanagale Wang 1975
Genus †Chianshania Xu 1976
Genus †Qipania Hu 1993
Genus †Hsiuannania Xu 1976
Genus †Anagalopsis Bohlin 1951
Genus †Anagale Simpson 1931
Genus †Kashanagale Szalay & McKenna 1971
Genus †Wangogale
Order Lagomorpha
Eocene–Recent

Genus †Gomphos Shevyreva 1975
Genus †Hypsimylus Zhai 1977
Genus †Anatolimylus Shevyre 1994
Genus †Dawsonolagus Li, Meng & Wang 2007
Genus †Ephemerolagus Vianey-Liaud & Lebrun 2013
Genus †Erenlagus Fostowicz-Frelik & Li 2014
Genus †Lushilagus Li 1965
Family †Mimotonidae Li 1978
Genus †Mimotona Li 1977
Family †Mimolagidae Erbajeva 1986
Genus †Mimolagus Bohlin 1951
Family †Prolagidae Gureev 1962
Genus †Prolagus Pomel 1853 [Myolagus Hensel 1856; Anoema Koenig 1825; Archaeomys Fraas 1856]
Family Ochotonidae Thomas 1897 [Lagomyidae Lilljeborg 1866; Amphilagidae Gureev 1953;  Prolagidae Gureev 1960; Ochotonida Averianov 1999] (pikas; mouse hares, conies)
Genus †Plicalagus Wu et al. 1998
Genus †Pseudobellatona Topachevs, Nes & Topachevs 1993
Genus †Desmatolagus Matthew & Granger 1927 [Agispelagus Argyropulo 1939; Bohlinotona de Muizon 1977; Procaprolagus Gureev 1960]
Genus †Sinolagomys Bohlin 1937 [Ochotonolagus Gureev 1960]
Genus †Piezodus Viret 1929
Genus †Amphilagus Pomel 1853
Genus †Australagomys Stromer 1926 [a leporid?]
Genus †Marcuinomys Lavocat 1951
Genus †Ptychoprolagus Tobien 1975
Genus †Heterolagus Crusafont Pairo, Villalta & Truyols 1955
Genus †Lagopsis Schlosser 1894 non Rafinesque 1815 nomen nudum [Opsolagus Kretzoi 1941]
Genus †Titanomys von Meyer 1843 [Platyodon Bravard 1853 non Conrad 1837]
Genus †Kenyalagomys MacInnes 1957
Genus †Oreolagus Dice 1917
Genus †Cuyamalagus Hutchison & Lindsay 1974
Genus †Oklaholmalagus Dalquest, Baskin & Schultz 1996
Genus †Albertona Lopez-Martinez 1986
Genus †Bellatona Dawson 1961
Genus †Russellagus Storer 1970
Genus †Gymnesicolagus Mein & Adrover 1982
Genus †Hesperolagomys Clark, Dawson & Wood 1964
Genus †Alloptox Dawson 1961 [Metochotona Kretzoi 1941]
Genus †Ochotonoides Teilhard de Jardin & Young 1931 [Prolagomys Erbajeva 1975]
Genus †Ochotonoma Sen 1998
Genus †Paludotona Dawson 1959
Genus †Pliolagomys Agadjanian & Erbajeva 1983
Family Leporidae Fischer de Waldheim 1817 non Gray 1821 [Leporida Averianov 1999] (rabbits & hares)
Genus †Austrolagomys Stromer 1926
Genus †Coelogenys Illiger 1811
Genus †Shamolagus Burke 1941
Genus †Tsaganolagus Li 1978
Genus †Gobiolagus Burke 1941
Genus †Strenulagus Tong & Lei 1987
Genus †Ordolagus de Muizon 1977
Genus †Litolagus Dawson 1958
Genus †Gripholagomys Green 1972
Genus †Lepoides White 1988
Genus †Valerilagus Shevyreva 1995
Genus †Zaissanolagus Erbajeva 1999
Genus †Trituberolagus Tong 1997
Genus †Romanolagus Shevyreva 1995
Genus †Annalagus Shevyreva 1996 (nomen dubium)
Subfamily †Archaeolaginae Dice 1929
Genus †Panolax Cope 1874
Genus †Pewelagus White 1984
Genus †Notolagus Wilson 1938
Genus †Archaeolagus Dice 1917
Genus †Hypolagus Dice 1917 [Lagotherium Pictet 1853; Pliolagus Kormos 1934]
Subfamily Palaeolaginae Dice 1929 [Mytonilagidae Burke 1941] ()
Genus †Chadrolagus Gawne 1978
Genus †Limitolagus Fostowicz-Frelik 2013
Genus †Megalagus Walker 1931 sensu McKenna & Bell 1996 [Tachylagus Storer 1992; Montanolagus Gureev 1964]
Genus †Serengetilagus Dietrich 1941
Genus †Mytonolagus Burke 1934
Genus †Palaeolagus Leidy 1856
Genus †Pliopentalagus Gureev & Konkova 1964
Genus †Pliosiwalagus Patnaik 2001
Subfamily Leporinae (Gray 1821) Trouessart 1880
Genus †Nuralagus Quintana, Köhler & Moyà-Solà 2011 (Minorcan giant lagomorph)
Genus †Trischizolagus Radulesco & Samson 1967 [Hispanolagus Janvier & Montenat 1971]
Genus †Pronotolagus White 1991
Genus †Paranotolagus Miller & Carranza-Castañeda 1982
Genus †Notolagus Wilson 1938
Genus †Alilepus Dice 1931
Genus †Pratilepus Hibbard 1934
Genus †Aluralagus Downey 1968
Genus †Aztlanolagus Russell & Harris 1986
Genus †Nekrolagus [Pediolagus Hibbard 1939 non Marelli 1927]
Order Rodentia
Paleocene–Recent

Family †Eurymylidae Dashzeveg & Russell 1988 [Rhombomylidae Li et al. 1987]
Family †Laredomyidae Wilson & Westgate 1991
Family †Cocomyinae de Bruijn, Hussain & Leinders 1982
Family †Ivanantoniidae Shevyreva 1989
Family †Alagomyidae
Family †Paramyidae
Family †Cylindrodontidae Miller & Gidley 1918
Family †Sciuravidae Miller & Gidley 1918
Family †Zegdoumyidae Vianey-Liaud et al. 1994
Suborder Sciuromorpha Brandt 1855
Family †Ischyromyidae Alston 1876
Family †Microparamyinae Wood 1962
Family †Theridomyidae Alston 1876
Family †Allomyidae Marsh 1877
Family †Mylagaulidae Cope 1881
Family †Reithroparamyidae Wood 1962
Suborder Ctenodactylomorpha
Family †Laonastidae Jenkins et al. 2005
Suborder Hystricomorpha
Family †Diatomyidae Mein & Ginsburg 1997
Family †Chapattimyinae Hussain, de Bruijn & Leinders 1978
Family †Tsaganomyidae Matthew & Granger 1923
Family †Baluchimyinae Flynn et al. 1986
Family †Diamantomyidae Schaub 1958
Family †Myophiomyidae Lavocat 1973
Family †Phiomyidae Wood 1955
Family †Kenyamyidae Lavocat 1973
Family †Bathyergoididae Lavocat 1973
Family †Heptaxodontidae Anthony 1917
Family †Neoepiblemidae Kraglievich 1926 [Perimyidae Landry 1957]
Family †Cephalomyidae Ameghino 1897
Family †Eocardiidae Ameghino 1891
Suborder Castorimorpha Wood 1955
Family †Eutypomyidae Miller & Gidley 1918
Family Geomyoidea Bonaparte, 1845
Subfamily †Mojavemyinae Korth and Chaney, 1999
Family †Rhizospalacidae Thaler 1966
Suborder Anomaluromorpha Bugge 1974
Family †Parapedetidae McKenna & Bell 1997
Suborder Myomorpha Brandt 1855
Family †Protoptychidae Schlosser 1911
Family †Anomalomyidae Schaub 1925
Family †Simimyidae Wood 1980
Family †Armintomyidae Dawson, Krishtalka & Stucky 1990
Order †Condylarthra
Note: The "condylarths" are considered paraphyletic, i.e. a grouping of early ungulate-like mammals not necessarily closely related.
Paleocene–Eocene

Family Arctocyonidae
Genus Arctocyon
Genus Chriacus
Family Periptychidae
Genus Ectoconus
Genus Oxyacodon
Family Hyopsodontidae
Genus Hyopsodus
Family Mioclaenidae
Family Phenacodontidae
Genus Meniscotherium
Genus Phenacodus
Family Protungulatidae
Genus Protungulatum
Family Didolodontidae
Genus Didolodus
Family Sparnotheriodontidae?
Family incertae sedis
Genus Abdounodus
Genus Ocepeia
Order †Mesonychia
Family Triisodontidae
Eoconodon
Goniacodon
Stelocyon
Triisodon
Family Hapalodectidae
Genus Hapalodectes
Family Mesonychidae
Genus Ankalagon
Genus Mesonyx
Mesonyx obtusidens
Genus Dissacus
Genus Jiangxia
Genus Pachyaena
Genus Synoplotherium
Genus Sinonyx
Genus Yantanglestes
Order †Litopterna
Paleocene–Pleistocene

Family Protolipternidae
Superfamily Macrauchenioidea
Family Macraucheniidae
Genus Cramauchenia
Genus Macrauchenia
Genus Huayqueriana
Genus Paranauchenia
Genus Promacrauchenia
Genus Scalabrinitherium
Genus Theosodon
Genus Victorlemoinea
Genus Windhausenia
Genus Xenorhinotherium
Family Notonychopidae
Family Adianthidae
Superfamily Proterotherioidea
Family Proterotheriidae
Genus Diadiaphorus
Genus Thoatherium
Order †Notoungulata
Paleocene–Pleistocene
Suborder Notioprogonia
Family Henricosborniidae
Family Notostylopidae
Genus Notostylops
Suborder Toxodontia
Family Isotemnidae
Genus Thomashuxleya
Family Leontiniidae
Genus Scarrittia
Family Notohippidae
Genus Rhynchippus
Family Toxodontidae
Genus Adinotherium
Genus Toxodon
Genus Trigodon
Genus Mixotoxodon
Genus Nesodon
Family Homalodotheriidae
Genus Chasicotherium
Genus Homalodotherium
Suborder Typotheria
Family Oldfieldthomasiidae
Family Interatheriidae
Genus Protypotherium
Genus Interatherium
Family Archaeopithecidae
Family Campanorcidae
Genus Campanorco
Family Mesotheriidae
Subfamily Fiandraiinae
Genus Fiandraia
Subfamily Mesotheriinae
Genus Altitypotherium
Genus Caraguatypotherium
Genus Eotypotherium
Genus Eutypotherium
Genus Hypsitherium
Genus Mesotherium
Genus Microtypotherium
Genus Plesiotypotherium
Genus Pseudotypotherium
Genus Typotheriopsis
Subfamily Trachytheriinae
Genus Anatrachytherus
Genus Trachytherus
Suborder Hegetotheria
Family Archaeohyracidae
Genus Eohyrax
Eohyrax rusticus
Family Hegetotheriidae
Genus Hemihegetotherium
Species Hemihegetotherium trilobus
Genus Pachyrukhos
Order †Astrapotheria
Eocene–Miocene

Genus †Antarctodon Bond et al. 2011
Genus †Astrapodon Ameghino 1891
Genus †Edvardocopeia Ameghino 1901
Genus †Monoeidodon Roth 1898
Genus †Proplanodus Ameghino 1902
Genus †Tonorhinus Ameghino 1904 [Notorhinus Roth 1903 non Leng 1884]
Genus †Pleurystylops Ameghino 1901
Genus †Pseudostylops Ameghino 1901
Genus †Shecenia Simpson 1935
Genus †Traspoatherium Ameghino 1894
Genus †Tychostylops Ameghino 1901
Genus †Tetragonostylops Paula Couto 1963
Family †Eoastrapostylopidae Soria & Powell 1981
Genus †Eoastrapostylops Soria & Powell 1981
Family †Trigonostylopidae Ameghino 1901
Genus †Trigonostylops Ameghino 1897 [Chiodon Berg 1899; Staurodon Roth 1899 non Lowe 1854]
Family †Albertogaudryinae Simpson 1945
Genus †Albertogaudryia Ameghino 1901
Family †Astrapotheriidae Ameghino 1887
Genus †Isolophodon Roth 1903
Genus †Scaglia Simpson 1957
Genus †Astraponotus Ameghino 1901 [Notamynus Roth 1903; Grypolophodon Roth 1903; Megalophodon Roth 1903]
Genus †Maddenia Kramarz & Bond 2009 non Hook.f. & Thomson
Genus †Comahuetherium Kramarz & Bond 2011
Genus †Parastrapotherium Ameghino 1895 [Liarthrus Ameghino 1895; Traspoatherium Ameghino 1895; Henricofilholia Ameghino 1901; Helicolophodon Roth 1903]
Subfamily †Astrapotheriinae Ameghino 1887
Genus †Astrapothericulus Ameghino 1901
Genus †Astrapotherium Burmeister 1879 [Listriotherium Mercerat 1891; Mesembriotherium Moreno 1882; Xylotherium Mercerat 1891]
Subfamily †Uruguaytheriinae Kraglievich 1928
Genus †Uruguaytherium Kraglievich 1928
Genus †Granastrapotherium Johnson & Madden 1997
Genus †Hilarcotherium Vallejo-Pareja et al. 2015
Genus †Xenastrapotherium Kraglievich 1928 [Synastrapotherium Paula Couto 1976]
Order †Xenungulata
Paleogene

Family †Carodniidae Paula Couto 1952 [Etayoidae Villarroel 1987]
Genus †Notoetayoa Gelfo, López & Bond 2008
Genus †Etayoa Villarroel 1987
Genus †Carodnia Simpson 1935 [Ctalecarodnia Simpson 1935]
Order †Pyrotheria
Eocene–Oligocene

Family †Colombitheriidae Hoffstetter 1970
Genus †Baguatherium
Genus †Colombitherium Hoffstetter 1970
Genus †Proticia Patterson 1977
Family †Pyrotheriidae Ameghino 1889 [Carolozittelidae Ameghino 1901]
Genus †Planodus Ameghino 1887
Genus †Carolozittelia Ameghino 1901 [Archaeolophus Ameghino 1897]
Genus †Griphodon Anthony 1924
Genus †Propyrotherium Ameghino 1901 [Promoeritherium Ameghino 1906]
Genus †Pyrotherium Ameghino 1889 [Ricardowenia Ameghino 1901; Parapyrotherium Ameghino 1902]
Order †Dinocerata
Eocene–Eocene

Family †Uintatheriidae Flower 1876 [Tinoceratidae Marsh 1872; Sphaleroceratinae Brandt 1878; Eobasiliidae Cope 1873]
Genus †Megaceratops Cope 1873
Subfamily †Gobiatheriinae Flerov 1950
Genus †Gobiatherium Osborn & Granger 1932
Subfamily †Uintatheriinae Flower 1876 [Prodinoceratidae Flerov 1952; Bathyopsidae Osborn 1898]
Genus †  Matthew, Granger & Simpson 1929 Jiaoloutherium Tong 1978; Houyanotherium Tong 1978; Zhaia Kretzoi & Kretzoi 2000; Pyrodon Zhai 1978; Phenaceras Tong 1979; Ganatherium Tong 1979; Eobathyopsis Osborn 1929; Mongolotherium Flerov 1952]
Genus †Probathyopsis Cope 1881 [Bathyopsoides Patterson 1939; Prouintatherium Dorr 1958]
Genus †Bathyopsis Cope 1881
Genus †Uintatherium Leidy 1872c [Dinoceras Marsh 1872; Ditetroedon Cope 1885; Elachoceras Scott 1886; Laoceras Marsh 1886; Octotomus Cope 1885; Paroceras Marsh 1886; Platoceras Marsh 1886; Tinoceras Marsh 1872; Uintamastix Leidy 1872]
Genus †Eobasileus Cope 1872 [Uintacolotherium Cook 1926; Lefelaphodon Cope 1872]
Genus †Tetheopsis Cope 1885
Order †Arctostylopida
Family Arctostylopidae Schlosser 1923
Genus †Allostylops Zheng 1979
Genus †Wanostylops Huang & Zheng 1997
Subfamily †Kazachostylopinae Nesov 1987
Genus †Kazachostylopus Nesov 1987
Subfamily †Asiastylopinae
Genus †Asiastylops Zheng 1979
Subfamily †Arctostylopinae [Palaeostylopidae Hau 1976]
Tribe †Sinostylopini
Genus †Sinostylops Tang & Yan 1976
Genus †Bothriostylops Zheng & Huang 1986
Tribe †Arctostylopini
Genus †Arctostylops Matthew 1915
Genus †Palaeostylops Matthew & Granger 1925
Genus †Gashatostylops Cifelli, Schaff & McKenna 1989
Genus †Anatolostylops Zheng 1979
Order †Creodonta
Paleocene–Late Miocene

Genus †Preregidens Solé, Falconnet & Vidalenc 2015
Genus †Prionogale Schmidt-Kittler & Heizmann 1991
Subfamily †Koholiinae Crochet 1988
Subfamily †Machaeroidinae Matthew 1909
Family †Oxyaenidae Cope 1877
Genus †Oxyaena Cope 1873
Genus †Palaeonictis Blainville 1842
Genus †Patriofelis Leidy 1872
Genus †Sarkastodon Granger 1938
Genus †Apataelurus Scott 1938
Family †Hyaenodontidae Leidy 1869 [Proviverridae Schlosser 1886; Limnocyonidae Gazin 1946; Stypolophinae Trouessart 1885]
Genus †Hyaenodon Laizer & Parieu 1838
Genus †Megistotherium Savage 1973
Genus †Sinopa Leidy 1871
Order Carnivora
Paleocene–Recent

Genus †Ravenictis Fox & Youzwyshyn 1994 [? Carnivoramorpha]
Suborder Caniformia (dog-like carnivores)
Superfamily Amphicyonoidea
Family Amphicyonidae (bear-dogs)
Genus Amphicyon
Genus Cynodictis
Genus Daphoenus
Infraorder Arctoidea
Parvorder Mustelida
Family Procyonidae (raccoon family)
Genus Chapalmalania
Family Mephitidae (skunks)
Family Mustelidae (weasel family)
Genus Algarolutra
Genus Cyrnaonyx
Genus Ekorus
Genus Megalenhydris
Genus Plesictis
Genus Sardolutra
Family Ailuridae (red panda family)
Genus Actiocyon
Genus Alopecocyon
Genus Amphictis
Genus Magerictis
Genus Parailurus
Genus Pristinailurus
Genus Protursus
Genus Simocyon
Parvorder Pinnipedomorpha
Family Amphicynodontidae?
Family Semantoridae
Genus Potamotherium
Superfamily Pinnipedia
Family Enaliarctidae
Genus Enaliarctos
Family Otariidae (eared seals)
Family Odobenidae (walruses)
Genus Imagotaria
Family Phocidae (Earless seals)
Genus Acrophoca
Genus Desmatophoca
Parvorder Ursida
Superfamily Ursoidea
Family Ursidae (bears)
Genus Ursavus
Subfamily Hemicyoninae
Genus Cephalogale
Genus Dinocyon
Genus Hemicyon
Genus Phoberocyon
Genus Phoberogale
Genus Plithocyon
Genus Zaragocyon
Subfamily Ailuropodinae (pandas)
Genus Agriarctos
Genus Ailurarctos
Genus Ailuropoda
Ailuropoda microta
Genus Agriotherium
Genus Huracan
Genus Indarctos
Genus Kretzoiarctos
Subfamily Tremarctinae (short-faced bears)
Genus Arctodus
Genus Arctotherium
Genus Plionarctos
Genus Tremarctos
Florida cave bear (Tremarctos floridanus)
Subfamily Ursinae
Genus Ursus
Auvergne bear (Ursus minimus)
Etruscan bear (Ursus etruscus)
Eurasian cave bear (Ursus spelaeus)
Infraorder Cynoidea
Family Canidae (Canids)
Genus Canis (dogs and wolves)
Dire wolf (Canis dirus)
Canis falconeri
Canis lepophagus
Genus Cerdocyon
Genus Cynodesmus
Genus Leptocyon
Genus Phlaocyon
Subfamily Hesperocyoninae
Genus Hesperocyon
Subfamily Borophaginae
Genus Aelurodon
Genus Borophagus
Genus Epicyon
Genus Osteoborus
Family Miacidae
Genus Miacis
Suborder Feliformia (cat-like carnivores)
Family Felidae (Felids)
Subfamily Proailurinae
Genus Proailurus
Proailurus lemanensis
Genus Pseudaelurus
Subfamily Machairodontinae (Sabre-toothed cats)
Genus Tchadailurus
Tchadailurus adei
Tribe Metailurini
Genus Metailurus
Metailurus major
Metailurus mongonliensis
Metailurus boodon
Metailurus ultimus
Genus Adelphailurus
Adelphailurus kansensis
Genus Stenailurus
Stenailurus teilhardi
Genus Dinofelis
Dinofelis cristata
Dinofelis diastemata
Dinofelis paleoonca
Dinofelis barlowi
Dinofelis piveteaui
Dinofelis aronoki
Dinofelis darti
Dinofelis petteri
Genus Yoshi
Yoshi minor
Yoshi garevskii
Tribe Smilodontini
Genus Smilodon
Smilodon gracilis
Smilodon fatalis
Smilodon populator
Genus Rhizosmilodon
Rhizosmilodon fiteae
Genus Megantereon
Megantereon cultridens
Megantereon ekidoit
Megantereon inexpectatus
Megantereon microta
Megantereon nihowanensis
Megantereon vakhshensis
Megantereon whitei
Genus Promegantereon
Promegantereon ogygia
Genus Paramachairodus
Paramachairodus orientalis
Paramachairodus miximiliani
Paramachairodus transasiaticus
Tribe Homotherini
Genus Homotherium
Homotherium latidens
Homotherium serum
Homotherium venezuelensis
Homotherium ischyrus
Genus Lokotunjailurus
Lokotunjailurus emgeritus
Lokotunjailurus fanonei
Genus Nimravides
Nimravides catacopsis
Nimravides pedionomus
Nimravides hibbardi
Nimravides galiani
Nimravides thinobates
Genus Xenosmilus
Xenosmilus hodsonae
Genus Amphimachairodus
Amphimachairodus giganteus
Amphimachairodus coloradensis
Amphimachairodus kuteni
Amphimachairodus kabir
Tribe Machairodontini
Genus Machairodus
Machairodus africanus
Machairodus aphanistus
Machairodus horribilis
Machairodus robinsoni
Machairodus alberdiae
Machairodus laskerevi
Machairodus oradensis
Genus Miomachairodus
Miomachairodus pseudaeluroides
Genus Hemimachairodus
Hemimachairodus zwierzyckii
Subfamily Felinae (Conical-toothed cats)
Tribe Pantherini
Genus Panthera
Panthera atrox
Panthera spelaea
Panthera palaeosinensis
Panthera youngi
Panthera blytheae
Panthera zdanskyi
Panthera gombaszoegensis
Tribe Felini
Genus Acinonyx
Acinonyx pardinensis
Acinonyx aicha
Acinonyx intermedius
Genus Puma
Puma pardoides
Puma pumoides
Genus Lynx
Lynx issiodorensis
Lynx thomasi
Lynx rexroadensis
Genus Leopardus
Leopardus vorohuensis
Genus Felis
Felis lunensis
Felis imperialis
Genus Pristifelis
Pristifelis attica
Genus Miracinonyx
Miracinonyx inexpectatus
Miracinonyx trumani
Genus Katifelis
Katifelis nightingalei
Genus Asilifelis
Asilifelis coteae
Genus Namafelis
Namafelis minor
Genus Diamantofelis
Diamantofelis ferox
Genus Pratifelis
Pratifelis martini
Genus Sivapanthera
Sivapanthera brachygnathus
Sivapanthera pleistocaenicus
Sivapanthera potens
Sivapanthera linxiaensis
Sivapanthera padhriensis
Genus Sivaelurus
Sivaelurus chinjiensis
Genus Vishnufelis
Genus Dolichofelis
Genus Sivapardus
Family Herpestidae (mongooses)
Family Hyaenidae (hyenas)
Genus Chasmaporthetes
Genus Crocuta
Crocuta spelaea
Crocuta macrodonta
Crocuta eximia
Crocuta sivalensis
Crocuta dietrichi
Genus Protictitherium
Genus Ictitherium
Genus Chasmaporthetes
Genus Adcrocuta
Genus Pachycrocuta
Genus Percrocuta
Family Nandiniidae
Family Viverravidae (viverravids)
Family Viverridae (civets)
Genus Kanuites
Genus Viverra
Viverra leakeyi
Vishnuictis
Family Stenoplesictidae
Family Nimravidae (nimravids)
Genus Nimravus
Genus Eusmilus
Genus Hoplophoneus
to be sorted

Genus Lokotunjailurus
Superoder Xenarthra (Edentata)
Paleocene–Recent

Genus †Protobradys? Ameghino 1902 [Incertae sedis]
Order Cingulata Illiger 1811 [Loricata Owen 1842 non Merrem 1820; Hicanodonta Ameghino 1889] (armadillos)
Family †Peltephilidae Ameghino 1894
Genus †Peltephilus Ameghino 1887 [Cochlops Ameghino 1889; Gephyranodus Ameghino 1891]
Genus †Peltecoelus Ameghino 1902
Genus †Parapeltecoelus Bordas 1938
Genus †Anantiosodon Ameghino 1891
Genus †Epipeltephilus Ameghino 1904
Family Dasypodidae Gray 1821 [Stegotheridae Ameghino 1889; Scoteopsidae Ameghino 1894; Astegotheriidae Ameghino 1906; Tatusidae Burnett 1830; Praopidae Ameghino 1889; Tolypeutidae Gray 1869; Scleropleuridae Lahille 1895]
Subfamily Dasypodinae Gray 1821 sensu Gill 1872
Genus †Punatherium Ciancio et al. 2016
Tribe †Stegotheriini Ameghino 1889 sensu Patterson & Pascual 1968 [Stegotherinae Trouessant 1898]
Genus †Riostegotherium Oliveira & Bergqvist 1998
Genus †Prostegotherium Ameghino 1902
Genus †Pseudostegotherium Ameghino 1902
Genus †Astegotherium Ameghino 1902
Genus †Stegosimpsonia Vizcaíno 1994
Genus †Stegotherium Ameghino 1887 [Scotoeops Ameghino 1887]
Tribe Dasypodini Gray 1821
Genus †Propraopus Ameghino 1881 [Pontotatus Ameghino 1908]
Genus †Dasypodon Castellanos 1925
Genus †Pliodasypus Castro et al. 2014
Subfamily Tolypeutinae Gray 1865 [Tolypeutina Gray 1865; Tolypeutinae Alberdi, Leone & Tonni 1995;  Priodontinae Patterson & Pascual 1968]
Genus †Kuntinatu Billet, Hautier, de Muizon & Valentin 2011
Subfamily Euphractinae Winge 1923
Genus †Coelutaelus Ameghino 1902
Tribe †Utaetini Simpson 1945
Genus †Utaetus Ameghino 1902 [Posteutatus Ameghino 1902; Pareutaetus Ameghino 1902; Orthutaetus Ameghino 1902]
Tribe Eutatini Bordas 1933 [Eutaninae Bordas 1933]
Genus †Meteutatus Ameghino 1902 [Sadypus Ameghino 1902]
Genus †Anteutatus Ameghino 1902
Genus †Pseudeutatus Ameghino 1902 [Pachyzaedyus Ameghino 1902]
Genus †Stenotatus Ameghino 1891 [Stegotheriopsis Bordas 1939; Prodasypus Ameghino 1894]
Genus †Proeutatus Ameghino 1891 [Thoracotherium Mercerat 1891]
Genus †Archaeutatus Ameghino 1902
Genus †Paraeutatus Scott 1903 [Proparaeutatus Trouessart 1905]
Genus †Doellotatus Bordas 1932 [Eutatopsis Kraglievich 1934]
Genus †Chasicotatus Scillato-Yané 1977
Genus †Ringueletia Reig 1958
Genus †Eutatus Gervais 1867
Tribe Euphractini Winge 1923 [Euphractinae Pocock 1924]
Genus †Isutaetus Ameghino 1902
Genus †Anutaetus Ameghino 1902
Genus †Hemiutaetus Ameghino 1902
Genus †Amblytatus Ameghino 1902
Genus †Eodasypus Ameghino 1894
Genus †Prozaedyus Ameghino 1891
Genus †Vetelia Ameghino 1891
Genus †Proeuphractus Ameghino 1886
Genus †Paleuphractus Kraglievich 1934
Genus †Chorobates Reig 1958
Genus †Macroeuphractus Ameghino 1887 [Dasypotherium Moreno 1889]
Genus †Paraeuphractus Scillato-Yané 1980
Genus †Acantharodeia Rovereto 1914 [Macrochorobates Scillato-Yané 1980]
Superfamily Glyptodontoidea
Family †Pampatheriidae Paula Couto 1954
Genus †Tonnicinctus Góis et al. 2015
Genus †Machlydotherium Ameghino 1902
Genus †Kraglievichia Castellanos 1927 [Kraglievichia Castellanos 1937; Plaina Castellanos 1937]
Genus †Vassallia Castellanos 1927
Genus †Scirrotherium Edmund & Theodor 1997
Genus †Pampatherium Gervais & Ameghino 1880 [Pampatherium Ameghino 1875 nomen nudum; Chlamytherium Lund 1839; Clamydotherium Lund 1839 non Bronn 1838; Hoffstetteria Castellanos 1957]
Genus †Holmesina Simpson 1930
Family †Paleopeltidae Ameghino 1895 [Pseudorophodontidae Hoffstetter 1954]
Genus †Palaeopeltis Ameghino 1895 [Pseudorophodon Hoffstetter 1954]
Family †Glyptodontidae Gray 1969 [Haplophoridae Huxley 1864 sensu McKenna & Bell 1997; Doedicuridae Ameghino 1889; Propalaehoplophoridae Ameghino 1891; Sclerocalyptidae Ameghino 1904]
Genus †Heterodon Lund 1838 [preoccupied, nomen nudum?]
Genus †Orycterotherium Bronn 1838
Tribe †Neothoracophorini Castellanos 1951
Genus †Pseudoneothoracophorus Castellanos 1951
Genus †Neothoracophorus Ameghino 1889 [Thoracophorus Gervais & Ameghino 1880 non Hope 1840; Myloglyptodon Ameghino 1884; Pseudothoracophorus Castellanos 1951]
Subfamily †Glyptatelinae Castellanos 1932
Genus †Glyptatelus Ameghino 1897
Genus †Clypeotherium Scillato-Yané 1977
Genus †Neoglyptatelus Garlini, Vizcaíno & Scillato-Yané 1997
Genus †Pachyarmatherium Downing & White 1995
Subfamily †Propalaehoplophorinae Ameghino 1891
Genus †Propalaehoplophorus Ameghino 1887 [Propalaeohaplophorus Castellanos 1932; Propaleohoplophorus Frailey 1988]
Genus †Metopotoxus Ameghino 1895
Genus †Eucinepeltus Ameghino 1891
Genus †Asterostemma Ameghino 1889
Subfamily †Doedicurinae Ameghino 1889
Genus †Eleutherocercus Koken 1888
Genus †Prodaedicurus Castellanos 1927 [Palaeodoedicurus Castellanos 1927]
Genus †Comaphorus Ameghino 1886
Genus †Castellanosia Kraglievich 1932
Genus †Xiphuroides Castellanos 1927
Genus †Doedicurus Burmeister 1874
Genus †Daedicuroides Castellanos 1941
Genus †Plaxhaplous Ameghino 1884
Subfamily †Glyptodontinae Gray 1869
Tribe †Glyptotheriini Castellanos 1953
Genus †Glyptotherium [Brachyostracon Brown 1912; Boreostracon Simpron 1929; Xenoglyptodon Meade 1953]
Tribe †Glyptodontini Gray 1869
Genus †Glyptodontidium Cabrera 1944
Genus †Glyptodon Owen 1839 [Lepitherium Saint-Hilaire 1839; Lepidotherium Agassiz 1846; Pachypus D'Alton 1839 non Dejean 1831; Schistopleurum Nodot 1857; Glyptocoileus Castellanos 1952; Glyptopedius Castellanos 1953; Glyptostracon Castellanos 1953]
Genus †Stromatherium Castellanos 1953
Genus †Chlamydotherium Bronn 1838
Genus †Glyptostracon Castellanos 1953
Subfamily †Hoplophorinae Huxley 1864 [Sclerocalyptinae Trouessart 1898]
Genus †Asymmetrura Farina 1981
Genus †Caudaphorus Farina 1981
Genus †Uruguayurus Mones 1987
Tribe †Hoplophorini Huxley 1864 sensu McKenna & Bell 1997
Genus †Hoplophorus Lund 1838 [Sclerocalyptus Ameghino 1891]
Genus †Stromaphorus Castellanos 1926
Genus †Eusclerocalyptus Ameghino 1919
Genus †Hoplophractus Cabrera 1939
Genus †Trachycalyptus Ameghino 1908
Genus †Berthawyleria Castellanos 1939
Genus †Parahoplophorus Castellanos 1932
Genus †Isolinia Castellanos 1951
Genus †Stromaphoropsis Kraglievich 1932
Genus †Eosclerophorus Castellanos 1948
Genus †Trabalia Kraglievich 1932
Genus †Neosclerocalyptus Paula Couto 1957
Tribe †Palaehoplophorini Hoffstetter 1958
Genus †Palaehoplophorus Ameghino 1883
Genus †Aspidocalyptus Cabrera 1939
Genus †Chlamyphractus Castellanos 1939
Genus †Pseudoeuryurus Ameghino 1889
Genus †Protoglyptodon Ameghino 1885
Tribe †Lomaphorini Hoffstetter 1958
Genus †Peiranoa Castellanos 1946
Genus †Lomaphorops Castellanos 1932
Genus †Urotherium Castellanos 1926
Genus †Lomaphorus Ameghino 1889
Genus †Trachycalyptoides Saint-André 1996
Tribe †Plohophorini Castellanos 1932
Genus †Coscinocercus Cabrera 1939
Genus †Phlyctaenopyga Cabrera 1944
Genus †Plohophorops Rusconi 1934
Genus †Plohophorus Ameghino 1887
Genus †Pseudoplohophorus Castellanos 1926
Genus †Teisseiria Kraglievich 1932
Genus †Plohophoroides Castellanos 1928
Genus †Zaphilus Ameghino 1889
Tribe †Neuryurini Hoffstetter 1958
Genus †Neuryurus Ameghino 1889 [Euryurus Gervais & Ameghino 1880 non Koch 1847 non Von Der Marck 1864]
Tribe †Panochthini Castellanos 1927
Genus †Nopachthus Ameghino 1888
Genus †Panochthus Burmeister 1866 [Schistopleurum Nodot 1855]
Genus †Propanochthus Castellanos 1925
Genus †Parapanochthus Moreira 1971

Order Pilosa Flower 1883 [Bradypoda Blumenbach 1779; Anicanodonta Ameghino 1889]
Genus †Trematherium Ameghino 1887
Family †Entelopidae Ameghino 1889 [Entelopsidae Ameghino 1889; Dideilotheridae Ameghino 1894]
Genus †Entelops Ameghino 1887
Genus †Delotherium Ameghino 1889 [Dideilotherium Ameghino 1889]
Infraorder Vermilingua Illiger 1811 emend. Gray 1869 [Scandentia Fischer de Waldheim 1817 non Wagner 1855] (Hairy anteaters)
Genus †Argyromanis Ameghino 1904
Genus †Orthoarthrus Ameghino 1904
Family Cyclopedidae Pocock 1924 (silky/pygmy/two-toed anteater)
Genus †Palaeomyrmidon Roverento 1914
Family Myrmecophagidae Gray 1825 (tamandu)
Genus †Promyrmecophagus Ameghino 1904
Genus †Protamandua Ameghino 1904
Genus †Neotamandua Rovereto 1914
Infraorder Folivora Delsuc et al. 2001 [Phyllophaga Owen 1842 non Harris 1827; Phytophaga Huxley 1871; Tardigrada Latham & Davies 1795 sensu McKenna, Wyss & Flynn 2006 non non Spallanzani 1777; Tardigradae Gray 1821; Gravigrada Owen 1842] (sloths)
Genus †Amphiocnus Kraglievich 1922
Genus †Diellipsodon Berg 1899 [Elipsodon Roth 1898 non Elliopsodon Scott 1892 non Ellipsodon Scott 1892]
Genus †Prepoplanops Carlini, Brandoni & Dal Molin 2013
Genus †Pseudoglyptodon Engelmann 1987
Family †Rathymotheriidae Ameghino 1904
Genus †Rathymotherium Ameghino 1904
Clade †Mylodonta McKenna & Bell 1997
Genus †Baraguatherium Rincón et al. 2016
Genus †Eionaletherium Rincón et al. 2015
Genus †Pseudoprepotherium Hoffstetter 1961
Family †Orophodontidae Ameghino 1895 [Octodontobradyinae Santos, Rancy & Ferigolo 1993]
Subfamily †Orophodontinae
Genus †Proplatyarthrus Ameghino 1905
Genus †Orophodon Ameghino 1895
Subfamily †Octodontotheriinae Hoffstetter 1954
Genus †Octodontotherium Ameghino 1895
Genus †Octomylodon Ameghino 1904
Genus †Octodontobradys Santos, Rancy & Ferigolo 1993
Family †Scelidotheriidae Ameghino 1889 [Nematheridae Mercerat 1891]
Subfamily †Chubutheriinae Scillato-Yané 1977
Genus †Chubutherium Cattoi 1962
Subfamily †Scelidotheriinae Ameghino 1889
Genus †Sibyllotherium Scillato-Yane & Carlini 1998
Genus †Scelidotheriops Ameghino 1904
Genus †Analcitherium Ameghino 1891
Genus †Elassotherium Cabrera 1939
Tribe †Nematheriini
Genus †Nematherium Ameghino 1887 [Ammotherium Ameghino 1891; Lymodon Ameghino 1891]
Tribe †Scelidotheriini
Genus †Proscelidodon Bordas 1935
Genus †Catonyx Ameghino 1891 [Platyonyx Lund 1840 non Schoenherr 1826; Scelidodon Ameghino 1881; Scelidotherium (Catonyx) Ameghino 1891]
Genus †Neonematherium Ameghino 1904
Genus †Scelidotherium Owen 1839 [Spenodon Lund 1839; Sphenodontherium Trouessart 1905; Matschieella Poche 1904; (Scelidodon) Ameghino 1889; (Scelidotheridium) Kraglievich 1934]
Family †Mylodontidae Gill 1872
Genus †Mirandabradys
Genus †Paraglossotherium Esteban 1993
Genus †Urumacotherium Bocquentin-Villanueva 1983
Subfamily †Mylodontinae Gill 1872
Genus †Glossotheriopsis Scillato-Yané 1976
Genus †Promylodon Ameghino 1883
Genus †Strabosodon Ameghino 1891
Genus †Megabradys Scillato-Yané 1981
Genus †Pleurolestodon Rovereto 1914
Genus †Mylodon Owen 1839 [Gnathopsis Leidy 1852; Grypotherium Reinhardt 1879; Quatriodon Ameghino 1881; Mesodon Ameghino 1882 non Rafinesque 1821 non Wagner 1851; Tetrodon Ameghino 1882 non Linnaeus 1766; Glossotherium non Owen 1839]
Subfamily †Lestodontinae Ameghino 1889
Genus †Bolivartherium
Tribe †Thinobadistini McKenna & Bell 1997
Genus †Thinobadistes Hay 1919
Genus †Sphenotherus Ameghino 1891
Tribe †Lestodontini Ameghino 1889
Genus †Lestodon Gervais 1855 [Plioganphiodon Ameghino 1884; Prolestodon Kraglievich 1932]
Genus †Lestodontidion Roselli 1976
Tribe †Glossotheriini McKenna & Bell 1997
Genus †Acremylodon Mones 1986 [Stenodon Frailey 1986 non (sic) Ameghino 1885 non Lesson 1842 non Rafinesque 1818 non Van Beneden 1865]
Genus †Ranculcus Ameghino 1891
Genus †Glossotherium Owen 1839 [Eumylodon Ameghino 1904; Pseudolestodon Gervais & Ameghino 1880; Laniodon Ameghino 1881; Interodon Ameghino 1885; Nephotherium Ameghino 1886; Glossotheridium Kraglievich 1934; (Oreomylodon) Hoffstetter 1949]
Genus †Mylodonopsis Cartelle 1991
Genus †Paramylodon Brown 1903 [Orycterotherium Harlan 1841 non Bronn 1838; Eubradys Leidy 1853]
Clade Megatheria McKenna & Bell 1997
Family †Megalonychidae Gervais 1855 [Choloepidae Pocock 1924]
Family †Megatheriidae Gray 1821 [Schismotheridae Mercerat 1891]
Family †Nothrotheriidae Ameghino 1920 sensu de Muizon, McDonald, Salas & Urbina 2004
Order Pholidota
Eocene–Recent

Genus †Arcticanodon Rose, Eberle & McKenna 2004
Genus †Melaniella Fox 1984
Family †Escavadodontidae Rose & Lucas 2000
Genus †Escavadodon Rose & Lucas 2000
Family †Epoicotheriidae Simpson 1927
Genus †Amelotabes Rose 1978
Genus †Alocodontulum Rose, Bown & Simons 1978 [Alocodon Rose, Bown & Simons 1977 non Thulborn 1973]
Genus †Auroratherium  Tong & Wamg 1997
Genus †Pentapassalus Gazin 1952
Genus †Dipassalus Rose, Krishtalka & Stucky 1991
Genus †Tetrapassalus Simpson 1959a
Genus †Epoicotherium Simpson 1927 [Xenotherium Douglass 1906 non Ameghino 1904; Pseudochrysochloris Turnbull & Reed 1967]
Genus †Tubulodon Jepsen 1932
Genus †Xenocranium Colbert 1942
Family †Metacheiromyidae Wortman 1903
Genus †Propalaeanodon Rose 1979
Genus †Palaeanodon Matthew 1918
Genus †Brachianodon Gunnell & Gingerich 1993
Genus †Mylanodon Secord et al. 2002
Genus †Metacheiromys Wortman 1903
Suborder Pholidota Weber 1904 sensu stricto [Manidae Gray 1821 sensu lato] (pangolins/scaly anteaters)
Genus †Argyromanis Ameghino 1904
Genus †Orthoarthrus Ameghino 1904
Genus †Euromanis Gaudin, Emry & Wible 2009
Family †Eurotamanduidae Szalay & Schrenk 1994
Genus †Eurotamandua Storch 1978
Infraorder Eupholidota Gaudin, Emry & Wible 2009
Family †Eomanidae Storch 2003
Genus †Eomanis Storch 1978
Superfamily Manoidea
Genus †Necromanis Filhol 1893 [Leptomanis Filhol 1893; Necrodasypus Filhol 1893; Teutomanis Ameghino 1905; Galliaetatus Ameghino 1905]
Family †Patriomanidae Szalay & Schrenk 1998 sensu Gaudin, Emry & Pogue 2006
Genus †Patriomanis Emry 1970
Genus †Cryptomanis Gaudin, Emry & Pogue 2006
Family Manidae Gray 1821
Infraorder Cetacea
Eocene–Recent
Parvorder Archaeoceti

Family Raoellidae
Genus Indohyus
Family Pakicetidae
Genus Pakicetus
Pakicetus inachus
Genus Gandakasia
Genus Nalacetus
Genus Ichthyolestes
Family Ambulocetidae
Genus Ambulocetus
Genus Himalayacetus
Family Remingtonocetidae
Genus Kutchicetus
Family Protocetidae
Genus Rodhocetus (??? Ma)
Rodhocetus kasrani
Rodhocetus balochistanensis
Genus Protocetus
Family Dorudontidae
Genus Dorudon (40–36 Ma)
Dorudon atrox
Genus Zygorhiza
Family Basilosauridae
Genus Basilosaurus (40–37 Ma)
Basilosaurus cetoides
Basilosaurus hussaini
Basilosaurus isis
Suborder Mysticeti
Family Mammalodontidae
Genus Mammalodon
Family Cetotheriidae
Genus Cetotherium
Genus Piscobalaena
Family Janjucetidae
Genus Janjucetus
to be sorted

Genus Eobalaenoptera
Eobalaenoptera harrisoni
Suborder Odontoceti
Family Squalodontidae
Genus Prosqualodon
Genus Squalodon (shark tooth dolphin)
Family Eurhinodelphidae
Genus Eurhinodelphis
Family Kentriodontidae
Genus Kentriodon
Family Rhabdosteidae
Genus Rhabdosteus
Family Odobenocetopsidae
Genus Odobenocetops
Order Perissodactyla
Eocene–Recent
Suborder Hippomorpha
Superfamily Brontotheroidea
Family Brontotheriidae
Genus Pakotitanops
Genus Nanotitanops
Subfamily Lambdotheriinae
Genus Lambdotherium
Genus Xenicohippus
Subfamily Palaeosyopinae
Genus Palaeosyops
Genus Mulkrajanops
Subfamily Dolichorhininae
Genus Metarhinus
Genus Sphenocoelus
Genus Mesatirhinus
Subfamily Brontotheriinae
Genus Duchesneodus
Genus Megacerops
Subfamily Embolotheriinae
Genus Titanodectes
Genus Embolotherium
Genus Protembolotherium
Subfamily Brontopinae
Genus Brachydiastematherium
Genus Pachytitan
Genus Dianotitan
Genus Gnathotitan
Genus Microtitan
Genus Epimanteoceras
Genus Protitan
Genus Rhinotitan
Genus Metatitan
Genus Dolichorhinus
Genus Protitanotherium
Genus Parabrontops
Genus Oreinotherium
Genus Brontops
Genus Protitanops
Genus Pygmaetitan
Subfamily Telmatheriinae
Genus Acrotitan
Genus Desmatotitan
Genus Arctotitan
Genus Hyotitan
Genus Sthenodectes
Genus Telmatherium
Genus Sivatitanops
Subfamily Menodontinae
Genus Diplacodon
Genus Eotitanotherium
Genus Notiotitanops
Genus Menodus
Genus Ateleodon
Superfamily Pachynolophoidea
Family Pachynolophidae
Superfamily Equoidea
Family Palaeotheriidae
Genus Hyracotherium
Genus Propalaeotherium
Genus Palaeotherium
Family Equidae
Genus Miohippus
Genus Orohippus
Genus Mesohippus
Subfamily Anchitheriinae
Genus Sinohippus
Genus Megahippus
Genus Anchitherium
Subfamily Equinae
Genus Archaeohippus
Genus Cormohipparion
Genus Eurygnathohippus
Genus Hipparion
Genus Hippidion
Genus Hippotherium
Genus Merychippus
Genus Parahippus
Genus Pliohippus
Genus Scaphohippus
Suborder Ceratomorpha
Superfamily Rhinocerotoidea
Family Amynodontidae (hippo-rhinos)
Subfamily Amynodontinae
Subfamily Metamynodontinae
Genus Metamynodon
Family Hyracodontidae (giant rhinos)
Subfamily Indricotheriinae
Genus Forstercooperia
Genus Juxia
Genus Benaratherium?
Genus Urtinotherium
Genus Indricotherium
Baluchitherium (Indricotherium transouralicum)
Genus Paraceratherium
Paraceratherium bugtiense
Subfamily Allaceropinae
Subfamily Hyracodontinae
Genus Hyracodon
Family Rhinocerotidae (rhinos)
Genus Teleoceras
Genus Trigonias
Subfamily Rhinocerotinae
Genus Rhinoceros
Rhinoceros sivalensis
Rhinoceros platyrhinus
Genus Coelodonta
Woolly rhinoceros (Coelodonta antiquitatis)
Genus Dicerorhinus (Sumatran rhinoceros)
Dicerorhinus leakeyi
Subfamily Elasmotheriinae
Genus Sinotherium
Genus Iranotherium
Genus Menoceras
Genus Elasmotherium
Elasmotherium caucasicum
Giant rhinoceros (Elasmotherium sibiricum)
Superfamily Tapiroidea
Genus Hyrachyus
Family Helaletidae
Genus Lophiodon
Family Tapiridae
Miotapirus
Superfamily Chalicotheroidea
Family Lophiodontidae
Genus Lophiodon
Genus Lophiaspis
Family Chalicotheriidae
Subfamily Chalicotheriinae
Genus Chalicotherium
Genus Anisodon
Genus Nestoritherium
Subfamily Schizotheriinae
Genus Ancylotherium
Genus Borissiakia
Genus Chemositia
Genus Kalimantsia
Genus Limognitherium
Genus Moropus
Genus Tylocephalonyx
Order Artiodactyla
Eocene–Recent
Suborder Suina
Family Dichobunidae
Genus Messelobunodon
Genus Diacodexis
Family Entelodontidae (Entelodonts)
Genus Archaeotherium
Genus Brachyhyops
Genus Paraentelodon
Genus Cypretherium
Genus Daeodon
Genus Eoentelodon
Genus Entelodon
Genus Dinohyus
Family Suidae (pigs)
Genus Metridiochoerus
Genus Kubanochoerus
Genus Kolpochoerus
Genus Nyanzachoerus
Genus Notochoerus
Family Tayassuidae (peccaries)
Genus Platygonus
Genus Mylohyus
Family Oreodontidae (Oreodonts)
Genus Promerycochoerus
Genus Merycoidodon
Genus Brachycrus
Genus Leptauchenia
Genus Sespia
Genus Mesoreodon
Genus Miniochoerus
Genus Eporeodon
Family Cainotheriidae
Genus Cainotherium
Family Hippopotamidae (hippopotamii)
Genus Archaeopotamus
Genus Hippopotamus
Hippopotamus gorgops
European hippopotamus (Hippopotamus antiquus)
Madagascan hippo (Hippopotamus madagascariensis)
Madagascan dwarf hippo (Hippopotamus lemerlei)
Cretan dwarf hippopotamus (Hippopotamus creutzburgi)
Maltese hippopotamus (Hippopotamus melitensis)
Sicilian hippopotamus (Hippopotamus pentlandi)
Genus Hexaprotodon
Hexaprotodon harvardi
Madagascan pygmy hippo (Hexaprotodon madagascariensis)
Genus Phanourios
Cyprus dwarf hippopotamus (Phanourios minutus)
Genus Kenyapotamus
Family Anthracotheriidae
Genus Elomeryx
Genus Bothriogenys
Genus Bothriodon
Genus Anthracotherium
Genus Libycosaurus
Genus Merycopotamus
Suborder Tylopoda
Family Camelidae (camels)
Genus Aepycamelus (Miocene)
Genus Camelops (Pliocene – Pleistocene)
Genus Camelus
Camelus gigas
Camelus hesternus
Syrian camel
Camelus sivalensis
Genus Oxydactylus
Genus Poebrotherium
Genus Procamelus (Miocene)
Genus Stenomylus
Genus Titanotylopus (Miocene – Pleistocene)
Family Oromerycidae
Genus Protylopus
Suborder Ruminantia
Family Protoceratidae
Genus Protoceras
Genus Syndyoceras
Genus Synthetoceras
Genus Kyptoceras
Genus Pseudoprotoceras
Family Climacoceratidae
Genus Climacoceras
Genus Prolibytherium
Prolibytherium magnieri (Miocene)
Genus Orangemeryx
Family Tragulidae (chevrotains)
Genus Dorcatherium
Genus Dorcabune
Genus Siamotragulus
Genus Yunnanotherium
Family Giraffidae (giraffes)
Genus Eumeryx (Oligocene)
Genus Palaeotragus
Palaeotragus primaevus (Miocene)
Palaeotragus germaini (Miocene)
Genus Samotherium (Miocene–Pliocene)
Samotherium boissieri (Pliocene)
Genus Sivatherium
Sivatherium giganteum (Pleistocene)
Sivatherium maurusium (Pleistocene)
Genus Bohlinia (Miocene)
Bohlinia attica (synonym: Giraffa attica)
Genus Bramatherium
Genus Giraffokeryx
Genus Helladotherium
Genus Honanotherium
Genus Libytherium
Genus Mitilanotherium
Genus Shansitherium
Genus Okapia (okapis)
Okapia stillei (Pleistocene)
Genus Giraffa (giraffes)
Giraffa punjabiensis (Pliocene)
Giraffa priscilla (Pliocene)
Giraffa jumae (Pleistocene)
Giraffa gracilis (Pleistocene)
Giraffa sivalensis (Pleistocene)
Family Leptomericidae
Genus Leptomeryx
Family Archaeomerycidae
Genus Archaeomeryx
Family Palaeomerycidae
Genus Ampelomeryx
Genus Cranioceras
Genus Pediomeryx
Genus Triceromeryx
Family Hoplitomerycidae
Genus Hoplitomeryx
Family Moschidae (musk deers)
Genus Blastomeryx
Genus Longirostromeryx
Family Cervidae (deer)
Subfamily Muntiacinae (muntjacs)
Genus Dicrocerus
Genus Heteroprox
Subfamily Cervinae
Genus Candiacervus
Candiacervus ropalophorus
Candiacervus major
Candiacervus pygadiensìs
Candiacervus cretensis
Genus Megaloceros
Irish elk (Megaloceros giganteus) (died ~5700 BC)
Genus Eucladoceros
Genus Sinomegaceros
Subfamily Capreolinae
Alces carnutorum (Carnute elk)
Genus Navahoceros
American mountain deer Navahoceros fricki
Genus Libralces
Genus Odocoileus
Odocoileus lucasi
Genus Cervalces
Stag-moose Cervalces scotti
Family Antilocapridae (pronghorns)
Genus Capromeryx
Capromeryx minor
Genus Hayoceros
Genus Ilingoceros
Genus Cosoryx
Genus Meryceros
Genus Merycodus
Genus Paracosoryx
Genus Ramoceros
Genus Submeryceros
Genus Proantilocapra
Genus Osbornoceros
Genus Ottoceros
Genus Plioceros
Genus Sphenophalos
Genus Ceratomeryx
Genus Hexameryx
Genus Hexobelomeryx
Genus Stockoceros
Genus Tetrameryx
Genus Texoceros
Genus Antilocapra
Antilocapra maquinensis
Family Bovidae (Bovids)
Subfamily Bovinae
Genus Bos
Bos acutifrons
Bos planifrons
Aurochs (Bos primigenius) (died 1627)
Genus Bison
Ancient bison (Bison antiquus)
Steppe wisent (Bison priscus) (died Late Pleistocene)
Giant bison (Bison latifrons)
Bison occidentalis
Bison sivalensis
Genus Probison
Genus Bubalus
Bubalus cebuensis
Genus Pelorovis
Genus Eotragus
Genus Kipsigicerus
Genus Leptobos
Subfamily Alcelaphinae
Genus Megalotragus
Genus Parmularius
Subfamily Antilopinae
Genus Gazella
Gazella psolea
Gazella borbonica
Gazella deperdita
Gazella gaudryi
Gazella triquetrucornis
Subfamily Caprinae
Genus Bootherium
Harlan's muskox Bootherium bombifrons
Genus Capra
Capra dalii
Genus Euceratherium
Shrub-ox Euceratherium collinum
Genus Myotragus
Cave goat Myotragus balearicus
Genus Oioceros


Small mammals or micromammals are a subdivision of mammals based on their body mass and size. Different values have been used as the upper limit. The International Biological Programme has defined small mammals as species weighing up to 5 kg. Alternatively, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) groups the orders of rodents, tree shrews and eulipotyphlans (insectivores) together under the term small mammals.
A significant majority of mammal species falls into the category of small mammals. They are found in a great range of habitats and climate zones.
Characteristics
Many small mammals have a short livespan and high fertility rate, resulting in a comparatively high variability in genetic composition. Their size leads to a reduced energy need for movement, but a high energy requirement for maintaining body temperature. This results in a high rate of food intake, using a wide range food sources. Their small size, together with frequently nocturnal or crepuscular activity, provide some protection against predators.
List of speciesEulipotyphlansRodentsTree shrews
The tree shrews (family Tupaiidae) are non-rodent, primate-like animals and are classified into the order Scandentia. They are subdivided into two subfamilies: the diurnal subfamily Tupaiinae with five genera (Tupaia, Anathana, Dendrogale, Lyonogale, Urogale) and the nocturnal subfamily Ptilocercinae with a single genus, pen-tailed tree shrew Ptilocercus
Research and conservation
The SSC Small Mammal Specialist Group (SMSG) of the IUCN "serves as the global authority on the world's small mammals" both with regard to research as well as conservation efforts.


Aquatic mammals and semiaquatic mammals are a diverse group of mammals that dwell partly or entirely in bodies of water. They include the various marine mammals who dwell in oceans, as well as various freshwater species, such as the European otter. They are not a taxon and are not unified by any distinct biological grouping, but rather their dependence on and integral relation to aquatic ecosystems. The level of dependence on aquatic life varies greatly among species. Among freshwater taxa, the Amazonian manatee and river dolphins are completely aquatic and fully dependent on aquatic ecosystems. Semiaquatic freshwater taxa include the Baikal seal, which feeds underwater but rests, molts, and breeds on land; and the capybara and hippopotamus which are able to venture in and out of water in search of food.
Mammal adaptation to an aquatic lifestyle vary considerably between species. River dolphins and manatees are both fully aquatic and therefore are completely tethered to a life in the water. Seals are semiaquatic; they spend the majority of their time in the water, but need to return to land for important activities such as mating, breeding and molting. In contrast, many other aquatic mammals, such as hippopotamus, capybara, and water shrews, are much less adapted to aquatic living. Likewise, their diet ranges considerably as well, anywhere from aquatic plants and leaves to small fish and crustaceans. They play major roles in maintaining aquatic ecosystems, beavers especially.
Aquatic mammals were the target for commercial industry, leading to a sharp decline in all populations of exploited species, such as beavers. Their pelts, suited for conserving heat, were taken during the fur trade and made into coats and hats. Other aquatic mammals, such as the Indian rhinoceros, were targets for sport hunting and had a sharp population decline in the 1900s. After it was made illegal, many aquatic mammals became subject to poaching. Other than hunting, aquatic mammals can be killed as bycatch from fisheries, where they become entangled in fixed netting and drown or starve. Increased river traffic, most notably in the Yangtze river, causes collisions between fast ocean vessels and aquatic mammals, and damming of rivers may land migratory aquatic mammals in unsuitable areas or destroy habitat upstream. The industrialization of rivers led to the extinction of the Chinese river dolphin, with the last confirmed sighting in 2004.
Taxonomy and evolutionGroups
This list covers only mammals that live in freshwater. Although this can include both species that also live in saltwater, or that are members of otherwise marine families. For a list of saltwater mammals, see List of marine mammal species.
Order Sirenia: sirenians
Family Trichechidae: manatees
Amazonian manatee (Trichechus inunguis)
African manatee (Trichechus senegalensis)
West Indian manatee (Trichechus manatus)
Order Artiodactyla: even-toed ungulates
Suborder Whippomorpha
Family Platanistidae
Ganges river dolphin, or susu (Platanista gangetica)
Indus river dolphin, or bhulan (Platanista minor)
Family Iniidae
Amazon river dolphin, or boto (Inia geoffrensis)
Araguaian river dolphin (Inia araguaiaensis)
Family Lipotidae
Chinese river dolphin, or baiji (Lipotes vexillifer) likely extinct
Family Delphinidae
Irrawaddy dolphin (Orcaella brevirostris)
Tucuxi (Sotalia fluviatilis)
Guiana dolphin (Sotalia guianensis)
Family Phocoenidae
Yangtze finless porpoise (Neophocaena asiaeorientalis)
Family Hippopotamidae: hippopotamuses
Hippopotamus (Hippopotamus amphibius)
Pygmy hippopotamus (Choeropsis liberiensis)
Order Perissodactyla: odd-toed ungulates
Suborder Ceratomorpha
Family Rhinocerotidae: rhinoceroses
Indian rhinoceros (Rhinoceros unicornis)
Order Carnivora
Family Canidae
Bush dog (Speothos venaticus)
Family Mustelidae
Subfamily Lutrinae
Eurasian otter (Lutra lutra)
Hairy-nosed otter (Lutra sumatrana)
Spotted-necked otter (Hydrictis maculicollis)
Smooth-coated otter (Lutrogale perspicillata)
North American river otter (Lontra canadensis)
Southern river otter (Lontra provocax)
Neotropical river otter (Lontra longicaudis)
Marine otter (Lontra felina)
Giant otter (Pteronura brasiliensis)
African clawless otter (Aonyx capensis)
Oriental small-clawed otter (Aonyx cinerea)
Subfamily Mustelinae
European mink (Mustela lutreola)
American mink (Neogale vison)
Family Phocidae
Baikal seal (Pusa sibirica)
Ladoga seal (Pusa hispida ladogensis)
Saimaa seal (Pusa saimensis)
Ungava seal (Phoca vitulina mellonae)
Family Otariidae
California sea lion (Zalophus californianus)
Steller sea lion (Eumetopias jubatus)
Family Viverridae
Otter civet (Cynogale bennettii)
Aquatic genet (Genetta piscivora)
Family Herpestidae
Marsh mongoose (Atilax paludinosus)
Order Rodentia: rodents
Suborder Hystricomorpha
Capybara (Hydrochoerus hydrochaeris)
Lesser capybara (Hydrochoerus isthmius)
Coypu (Myocastor coypus)
Family Castoridae: beavers
North American beaver (Castor canadensis)
Eurasian beaver (Castor fiber)
Family Cricetidae
Subfamily Arvicolinae
Muskrat (Ondatra zibethicus)
Round-tailed muskrat (Neofiber alleni)
European water vole (Arvicola amphibius)
Southwestern water vole (Arvicola sapidus)
North American water vole (Microtus richardsoni)
Subfamily Sigmodontinae
Ucayali water rat (Amphinectomys savamis)
Ecuador fish-eating rat (Anotomys leander)
Ferreira's fish-eating rat (Daptomys ferreirai)
Musser's fish-eating Rat (Daptomys musseri)
Tingo María Fish-eating Rat (Daptomys nunashae)
Oyapock's fish-eating rat (Daptomys oyapocki)
Peruvian fish-eating rat (Daptomys peruviensis)
Venezuelan fish-eating rat (Daptomys venezuelae)
Chibchan water mouse (Chibchanomys trichotis)
Web-footed marsh rat (Holochilus brasiliensis)
Chacoan marsh rat (Holochilus chacarius)
Amazonian marsh rat (Holochilus nanus)
Brazilian Northeastern Marsh Rat (Holochilus oxe)
Common marsh rat, or Amazonian marsh rat (Holochilus sciureus)
Crab-eating rat (Ichthyomys hydrobates)
Ecuadorean crab-eating rat (Ichthyomys orientalis)
Pine's crab-eating rat (Ichthyomys pinei)
Pittier's crab-eating rat (Ichthyomys pittieri)
Stolzmann's crab-eating rat (Ichthyomys stolzmanni)
Tweedy's crab-eating rat (Ichthyomys tweedii)
Incan water mouse (Incanomys mayopuma)
Incan small-eared water mouse (Icanomys parviauris)
Lund's amphibious rat (Lundomys molitor)
Western Amazonian nectomys (Nectomys apicalis)
Magdalena-Cauca water rat (Nectomys grandis)
Trinidad water rat (Nectomys palmipes)
Amazonian nectomys (Nectomys rattus)
South American water rat (Nectomys squamipes)
Montane fish-eating rat (Neusticomys monticolus)
Voss' fish-eating rat (Neusticomys vossi)
Las Cajas water mouse (Neusticomys orcesi)
White-bellied Rice Rat (Oryzomys albiventer)
Coues's rice rat (Oryzomys couesi)
Nicaraguan rice rat (Oryzomys dimidiatus)
Gorgas's rice rat (Oryzomys gorgasi)
Marsh rice rat (Oryzomys palustris)
Brazilian false rice rat (Pseudoryzomys simplex)
Mexican water mouse (Rheomys mexicanus)
Goldman's water mouse (Rheomys raptor)
Thomas's water mouse (Rheomys thomasi)
Underwood's water mouse (Rheomys underwoodi)
Argentine swamp rat (Scapteromys aquaticus)
Plateau swamp rat (Scapteromys meridionalis)
Waterhouse's swamp rat (Scapteromys tumidus)
Alfaro's rice water rat (Sigmodontomys alfari)
Family Muridae
Mountain water rat (Baiyankamys habbema)
Shaw Mayer's water rat (Baiyankamys shawmayeri)
Earless water rat (Crossomys moncktoni)
Rakali, or water-rat (Hydromys chrysogaster)
Western water rat (Hydromys hussoni)
New Britain water rat (Hydromys neobritannicus)
Ziegler's water rat (Hydromys ziegleri)
Mangrove mouse, or False water rat (Xeromys myoides)
East African wading rat (Colomys goslingi)
Cameroonean Wading Rat (Colomys eisentrauti)
Wologizi Wading Rat (Colomys wologizi)
Congo Wading Rat (Colomys lumumbai)
Ethiopian amphibious rat (Nilopegamys plumbeus)
Family Thryonomyidae
Greater cane rat (Thryonomys swinderianus)
Order Monotremata: monotremes
Platypus (Ornithorhynchus anatinus)
Order Afrosoricida
Family Potamogalidae
Giant otter shrew (Potamogale velox)
Nimba otter shrew (Micropotamogale lamottei)
Ruwenzori otter shrew (Micropotamogale ruwenzorii)
Family Tenrecidae
Aquatic tenrec (Microgale mergulus)
Order Eulipotyphla
Family Soricidae: shrews
Malayan water shrew (Chimarrogale hantu)
Himalayan water shrew (Chimarrogale himalayica)
Sunda water shrew (Chimarrogale phaeura)
Japanese water shrew (Chimarrogale platycephala)
Chinese water shrew (Chimarrogale styani)
Sumatran water shrew (Chimarrogale sumatrana)
Elegant water shrew (Nectogale elegans)
Mediterranean water shrew (Neomys anomalus)
Eurasian water shrew (Neomys fodiens)
Transcaucasian water shrew (Neomys teres)
Glacier Bay water shrew (Sorex alaskanus)
American water shrew (Sorex palustris)
Pacific water shrew, or marsh shrew (Sorex bendirii)
Family Talpidae (moles and relatives)
Star-nosed mole (Condylura cristata)
Russian desman (Desmana moschata)
Pyrenean desman (Galemys pyrenaicus)
Order Didelphimorphia: opossums
Family Didelphidae: opossums
Big lutrine opossum (Lutreolina crassicaudata)
Massoia's lutrine opossum (Lutreolina massoia)
Yapok (Chironectes minimus)
EvolutionMesozoic
One of the first known proto-mammals similar to modern placentals was aquatic, the Jurassic mammaliaform Castorocauda. It seems to have been adapted to water much like a beaver, with teeth different in many ways from all other docodonts, presumably due to a difference in diet. Most docodonts had teeth specialized for an omnivorous diet. The teeth of Castorocauda suggest that the animal was a piscivore, feeding on fish and small invertebrates. The first two molars had cusps in a straight row, eliminating the grinding function suggesting that they were strictly for gripping and not for chewing. This feature of three cusps in a row is similar to the ancestral condition in mammal relatives (as seen in triconodonts), but is almost certainly a derived character in Castorocauda. These first molars were also recurved in a manner adapted to hold slippery prey once grasped. These teeth are very similar to the teeth seen in mesonychians, an extinct group of semiaquatic carnivorous ungulates, and resemble, to a lesser degree, the teeth of seals.

Another docodontan, the Late Jurassic Haldanodon, has been suggested to be a platypus or desman-like swimmer and burrower, being well adapted to dig and swim and occurring in a wetland environment.
The tritylodontid Kayentatherium has been suggested to be semiaquatic. Unlike Castorocauda and Haldanodon, it was an herbivore, being probably beaver or capybara-like in habits.
Another lineage of Mesozoic mammals, the eutriconodonts, have been suggested to be aquatic animals with mixed results. Astroconodon occurred abundantly in freshwater lacustrine deposits and its molars were originally interpreted as being similar to those of piscivorous mammals like cetaceans and pinnipeds; by extension some researchers considered the possibility that all eutriconodonts were aquatic piscivores. However, Zofia Kielan-Jaworowska and other researchers have latter found that the triconodont molars of eutriconodonts were more suited for a carnassial-like shearing action than the piercing and gripping function of piscivorous mammal molars, occluding instead of interlocking, and that Astroconodon's aquatic occurrences may be of little significance when most terrestrial tetrapod fossils are found in lacustrine environments anyway.
However, two other eutriconodonts, Dyskritodon and Ichthyoconodon, occur in marine deposits with virtually no dental erosion, implying that they died in situ and are thus truly aquatic mammals. Nonetheless, Ichthyoconodon may not be aquatic, but instead a gliding mammal. More recently, Yanoconodon and Liaoconodon have been interpreted as semiaquatic, bearing a long body and paddle-like limbs.
A metatherian, the stagodontid Didelphodon, has been suggested to be aquatic, due to molar and skeleton similarities to sea otters.
Cenozoic
An extinct genus, Satherium, is believed to be ancestral to South American river otters, having migrated to the New World during the Pliocene or early Pleistocene. The South American continent houses the otter genus Lontra: the giant otter, the neotropical river otter, the southern river otter, and the marine otter. The smooth-coated otter (Lutrogale perspicillata) of Asia may be its closest extant relative; similar behaviour, vocalizations, and skull morphology have been noted.
The most popular theory of the origins of Hippopotamidae suggests that hippos and whales shared a common ancestor that branched off from other artiodactyls around 60 million years ago (mya). This hypothesized ancestral group likely split into two branches around 54 mya. One branch would evolve into cetaceans, possibly beginning about 52 mya, with the protowhale Pakicetus and other early whale ancestors collectively known as Archaeoceti, which eventually underwent aquatic adaptation into the completely aquatic cetaceans. The other branch became the anthracotheres, and all branches of the anthracotheres, except that which evolved into Hippopotamidae, became extinct during the Pliocene without leaving any descendants. River dolphins are thought to have relictual distributions, that is, their ancestors originally occupied marine habitats, but were then displaced from these habitats by modern dolphin lineages. Many of the morphological similarities and adaptations to freshwater habitats arose due to convergent evolution; thus, a grouping of all river dolphins is paraphyletic. For example, Amazon river dolphins are actually more closely related to oceanic dolphins than to South Asian river dolphins.

Sirenians, along with Proboscidea (elephants), group together with the extinct †Desmostylia and likely †Embrithopoda to form the Tethytheria. Tethytheria is thought to have evolved from primitive hoofed mammals ("condylarths") along the shores of the ancient Tethys Ocean. Tethytheria, combined with Hyracoidea (hyraxes), forms a clade called Paenungulata. Paenungulata and Tethytheria (especially the latter) are among the least controversial mammalian clades, with strong support from morphological and molecular interpretations. That is, elephants, hyraxes, and manatees share a common ancestry. The ancestry of Sirenia is distinct from that of Cetacea and Pinnipedia, although they are thought to have evolved an aquatic lifestyle around the same time.
The oldest fossil of the modern platypus dates back to about 100,000 years ago, during the Quaternary period. The extinct monotremes Teinolophos and Steropodon were once thought to be closely related to the modern platypus, but more recent studies show that platypodes are more related to the modern echidnas than to these ancient forms and that at least Teinolophos was a rather different mammal lacking several speciations seen in platypodes. However, the last common ancestor between platypodes and echidnas probably was aquatic, and echidnas thus secondarily became terrestrial. Monotrematum sudamericanum is currently the oldest aquatic monotreme known. It has been found in Argentina, indicating monotremes were present in the supercontinent of Gondwana when the continents of South America and Australia were joined via Antarctica, or that monotremes existed along the shorelines of Antarctica in the early Cenozoic.
Marine mammals
Marine mammals are aquatic mammals that rely on the ocean for their existence. They include animals such as sea lions, whales, dugongs, sea otters and polar bears. Like other aquatic mammals, they do not represent a biological grouping.

Marine mammal adaptation to an aquatic lifestyle vary considerably between species. Both cetaceans and sirenians are fully aquatic and therefore are obligate ocean dwellers. Pinnipeds are semiaquatic; they spend the majority of their time in the water, but need to return to land for important activities such as mating, breeding and molting. In contrast, both otters and the polar bear are much less adapted to aquatic living. Likewise, their diet ranges considerably as well; some may eat zooplankton, others may eat small fish, and a few may eat other mammals. While the number of marine mammals is small compared to those found on land, their roles in various ecosystems are large. They, namely sea otters and polar bears, play important roles in maintaining marine ecosystems, especially through regulation of prey populations. Their role in maintaining ecosystems makes them of particular concern considering 25% of marine mammal species are currently threatened.
Marine mammals were first hunted by aboriginal peoples for food and other resources. They were also the target for commercial industry, leading to a sharp decline in all populations of exploited species, such as whales and seals. Commercial hunting lead to the extinction of Steller's sea cow and the Caribbean monk seal. After commercial hunting ended, some species, such as the gray whale and northern elephant seal, have rebounded in numbers, however the northern elephant seal has a genetic bottleneck; conversely, other species, such as the North Atlantic right whale, are critically endangered. Other than hunting, marine mammals, dolphins especially, can be killed as bycatch from fisheries, where they become entangled in fixed netting and drown or starve. Increased ocean traffic causes collisions between fast ocean vessels and large marine mammals. Habitat degradation also threatens marine mammals and their ability to find and catch food. Noise pollution, for example, may adversely affect echolocating mammals, and the ongoing effects of global warming degrades arctic environments.
Adaptations
Mammals evolved on land, so all aquatic and semiaquatic mammals have brought many terrestrial adaptations into the waters.  They do not breathe underwater as fish do, so their respiratory systems had to protect the body from the surrounding water; valvular nostrils and an intranarial larynx exclude water while breathing and swallowing. To navigate and detect prey in murky and turbid waters, aquatic mammals have developed a variety of sensory organs: for example, manatees have elongated and highly sensitive whiskers which are used to detect food and other vegetation directly front of them, and toothed whales have evolved echolocation.
Aquatic mammals also display a variety of locomotion styles.  Cetaceans excel in streamlined body shape and the up-and-down movements of their flukes make them fast swimmers; the tucuxi, for example, can reach speeds of 14 miles per hour (23 km/h). The considerably slower sirenians can also propel themselves with their fluke, but they can also walk on the bottom with their forelimbs. The earless seals  (Phocidae) swim by moving their hind-flippers and lower body from side to side, while their fore-flippers are mainly used for steering. They are clumsy on land, and move on land by lunging, bouncing and wiggling while their fore-flippers keep them balanced; when confronted with predators, they retreat to the water as freshwater phocids have no aquatic predators.

Some aquatic mammals have retained four weight-bearing limbs (e.g. hippopotamuses, beavers, otters, muskrats) and can walk on land like fully terrestrial mammals. The long and thin legs of a moose limit exposure to and friction from water in contrast to hippopotamuses who keep most of their body submerged and have short and thick legs.  The semiaquatic pygmy hippopotamus can walk quickly on a muddy underwater surface thanks to robust muscles and because all toes are weight-bearing.  Some aquatic mammals with flippers (e.g. seals) are amphibious and regularly leave the water, sometimes for extended periods, and maneuver on land by undulating their bodies to move on land, similar to the up-and-down body motion used underwater by fully aquatic mammals (e.g. dolphins and manatees).
Beavers, muskrats, otters, and capybara have fur, one of the defining mammalian features, that is long, oily, and waterproof in order to trap air to provide insulation.  In contrast, other aquatic mammals, such as dolphins, manatees, seals, and hippopotamuses, have lost their fur in favor of a thick and dense epidermis, and a thickened fat layer (blubber) in response to hydrodynamic requirements.
Wading and bottom-feeding animals (e.g. moose and manatee) need to be heavier than water in order to keep contact with the floor or to stay submerged, surface-living animals (e.g. otters) need the opposite, and free-swimming animals living in open waters (e.g. dolphins) need to be neutrally buoyant in order to be able to swim up and down the water column. Typically, thick and dense bone is found in bottom feeders and low bone density is associated with mammals living in deep water.
The shape and function of the eyes in aquatic animals are dependent on water depth and light exposure: limited light exposure results in a retina similar to that of nocturnal terrestrial mammals. Additionally, cetaceans have two areas of high ganglion cell concentration ("best-vision areas"), where other aquatic mammals (e.g. seals, manatees, otters) only have one.
Among non-placental mammals, which cannot give birth to fully developed young, some adjustments have been made for an aquatic lifestyle. The yapok has a backwards-facing pouch which seals off completely when the animal is underwater, while the platypus deposits its young on a burrow on land.

Navigation and prey detection systems are also modified. As many aquatic mammals need to hunt at night or in turbid or deep water, their sensory systems have accordingly evolved. For example, certain aquatic mammals can detect vibrations of water from a school of fish swimming for hunting. Odontocetes (toothed whales) developed nasal structures that generate echolocation, enabling them to use sound to locate prey or navigate past obstacles.
EcologyKeystone species
Beaver ponds have a profound effect on the surrounding ecosystem. Their first and foremost ecological function is as a reservoir for times of drought, and prevent drying of riverbeds. In the event of a flood, beaver ponds slow down water-flow which reduces erosion on the surrounding soil. Beaver dams hold sediment, which reduces turbidity and thereby improving overall water quality downstream. This supplies other animals with cleaner drinking water and prevents degradation of spawning grounds for fish. However, the slower water speed and lack of shade from trees (that have since been cut down to construct the dam), results in the overall temperature increasing. They also house predatory zooplankton which help break down detritus and control algae populations.
Diet
Beavers are herbivores, and prefer the wood of quaking aspen, cottonwood, willow, alder, birch, maple and cherry trees. They also eat sedges, pondweed, and water lilies. Beavers do not hibernate, but rather they store sticks and logs in a pile in their ponds, eating the underbark. The dams they build flood areas of surrounding forest, giving the beaver safe access to an important food supply, which is the leaves, buds, and inner bark of growing trees. They prefer aspen and poplar, but will also take birch, maple, willow, alder, black cherry, red oak, beech, ash, hornbeam and occasionally pine and spruce. They will also eat cattails, water lilies and other aquatic vegetation, especially in the early spring.
Indian rhinoceros are grazers. Their diets consist almost entirely of grasses, but they also eat leaves, branches of shrubs and trees, fruits, and submerged and floating aquatic plants. They feed in the mornings and evenings. They use their prehensile lips to grasp grass stems, bend the stem down, bite off the top, and then eat the grass. They tackle very tall grasses or saplings by walking over the plant, with legs on both sides and using the weight of their bodies to push the end of the plant down to the level of the mouth.
Manatees make seasonal movements synchronized with the flood regime of the Amazon Basin. They are found in flooded forests and meadows during the flood season when food is abundant, and move to deep lakes during the dry season. The Amazonian manatee has the smallest degree of rostral deflection (25° to 41°) among sirenians, an adaptation to feed closer to the water surface.
A moose's diet often depends on its location, but they seem to prefer the new growths from deciduous trees with a high sugar content, such as white birch, trembling aspen and striped maple, among many others. They also eat many aquatic plants such as waterlily and water milfoil. To reach high branches, a moose may bend small saplings down, using its prehensile lip, mouth or body. For larger trees a moose may stand erect and walk upright on its hind legs, allowing it to reach plants 14.0 feet (4.26 m) off the ground. Moose are excellent swimmers and are known to wade into water to eat aquatic plants. Moose are thus attracted to marshes and river banks during warmer months as both provide suitable vegetation to eat and water to bathe in. Moose have been known to dive underwater to reach plants on lake bottoms, and the complex snout may assist the moose in this type of feeding. Moose are the only deer that are capable of feeding underwater.

Hippopotamuses leave the water at dusk and travel inland, sometimes up to 10 km (6 mi), to graze on short grasses, their main source of food. They spend four to five hours grazing and can consume 68 kg (150 lb) of grass each night. Like almost any herbivore, they consume other plants if presented with them, but their diet consists almost entirely of grass, with only minimal consumption of aquatic plants. The pygmy hippopotamus emerges from the water at dusk to feed. It relies on game trails to travel through dense forest vegetation. It marks trails by vigorously waving its tail while defecating to further spread its feces. The pygmy hippo spends about six hours a day foraging for food, and they do not eat aquatic vegetation to a significant extent and rarely eat grass because it is uncommon in the thick forests they inhabit. The bulk of a pygmy hippo's diet consists of ferns, broad-leaved plants and fruits that have fallen to the forest floor. The wide variety of plants pygmy hippos have been observed eating suggests that they will eat any plants available. This diet is of higher quality than that of the common hippopotamus.
The Amazon river dolphin has the most diverse diet among cetaceans, consisting of at least 53 species of fish. They mainly feed on croakers, cichlids, tetras, and piranhas, but they may also target freshwater crabs and river turtles. South Asian river dolphins mainly eat fish (such as carp, catfish, and freshwater sharks) and invertebrates, mainly prawns.
Generally, all aquatic desmans, shrews, and voles make quick dives and catch small fish and invertebrates. The giant otter shrew, for example, makes quick dives that last for seconds and grabs small crabs (usually no bigger than 2.8 inches (7 cm) across). The Lutrine opossum is the most carnivorous opossum, usually consuming small birds, rodents, and invertebrates. Water voles mainly eat grass and plants near the water and at times, they will also consume fruits, bulbs, twigs, buds, and roots. However, a population of water voles living in Wiltshire and Lincolnshire, England have started eating frogs' legs and discarding the bodies.
Interactions with humansExploitation
Fur robes were blankets of sewn-together, native-tanned, beaver pelts. The pelts were called castor gras in French and "coat beaver" in English, and were soon recognized by the newly developed felt-hat making industry as particularly useful for felting. Some historians, seeking to explain the term castor gras, have assumed that coat beaver was rich in human oils from having been worn so long (much of the top-hair was worn away through usage, exposing the valuable under-wool), and that this is what made it attractive to the hatters. This seems unlikely, since grease interferes with the felting of wool, rather than enhancing it. By the 1580s, beaver "wool" was the major starting material of the French felt-hatters. Hat makers began to use it in England soon after, particularly after Huguenot refugees brought their skills and tastes with them from France.
Sport hunting of the Indian rhinoceros became common in the late 1800s and early 1900s. Indian rhinos were hunted relentlessly and persistently. Reports from the middle of the 19th century claim that some British military officers in Assam individually shot more than 200 rhinos. By 1908, the population in Kaziranga had decreased to around 12 individuals. In the early 1900s, the species had declined to near extinction. Poaching for rhinoceros horn became the single most important reason for the decline of the Indian rhino after conservation measures were put in place from the beginning of the 20th century, when legal hunting ended. From 1980 to 1993, 692 rhinos were poached in India. In India's Laokhowa Wildlife Sanctuary, 41 rhinos were killed in 1983, virtually the entire population of the sanctuary. By the mid-1990s, poaching had rendered the species extinct there. In 1950, Chitwan's forest and grasslands extended over more than 2,600 km2 (1,000 sq mi) and were home to about 800 rhinos. When poor farmers from the mid-hills moved to the Chitwan Valley in search of arable land, the area was subsequently opened for settlement, and poaching of wildlife became rampant. The Chitwan population has repeatedly been jeopardized by poaching; in 2002 alone, poachers killed 37 animals to saw off and sell their valuable horns.
Otters have been hunted for their pelts since at least the 1700s. There has been a long history of otter pelts being worn around the world. In China it was standard for the royalty to wear robes made from them. People that were financially high in status also wore them. Otters have also been hunted using dogs, specifically the otterhound. In modern times, TRAFFIC, a joint program of the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) and International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), reported that otters are at serious risk in Southeast Asia and have disappeared from parts of their former range. This decline in populations is due to hunting to supply the demand for skins.
Habitat degradation
One problem at Lake Baikal is the introduction of pollutants into the ecosystem. Pesticides such as DDT and hexachlorocyclohexane, as well as industrial waste, mainly from the Baykalsk Pulp and Paper Mill, are thought to have been the cause of several disease epidemics among Baikal seal populations. The chemicals are speculated to concentrate up the food chain and weaken the Baikal seal's immune system, making them susceptible to diseases such as canine distemper and the plague, which was the cause of a serious Baikal seal epidemic that resulted in the deaths of thousands of animals in 1997 and 1999. Baikal seal pups have higher levels of DDT and PCB than known in any other population of European or Arctic earless seal.
In the 1940s, beavers were brought from Canada to the island of Tierra Del Fuego in southern Chile and Argentina, for commercial fur production. However, the project failed and the beavers, ten pairs, were released into the wild. Having no natural predators in their new environment, they quickly spread throughout the island, and to other islands in the region, reaching a number of 100,000 individuals within just 50 years. They are now considered a serious invasive species in the region, due to their massive destruction of forest trees, and efforts are being made for their eradication.
In some European countries, such as Belgium, France, and the Netherlands, the muskrat is considered an invasive pest, as its burrowing damages the dikes and levees on which these low-lying countries depend for protection from flooding. In those countries, it is trapped, poisoned, and hunted to attempt to keep the population down. Muskrats also eat corn and other farm and garden crops growing near water bodies.

Urban and agricultural development, increased damming, and increased use of hydroelectric power in rivers in countries such as Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana are threats to the African manatee's habitat and life, and thick congestion of boats in waterways may cause them to have a deadly run-in with the vessels. However, even natural occurrences, such as droughts and tidal changes, often strand manatees in an unsuitable habitat. Some are killed accidentally by fishing trawls and nets intended for catching sharks. The Amazonian manatee is at risk from pollution, accidental drowning in commercial fishing nets, and the degradation of vegetation by soil erosion resulting from deforestation. Additionally, the indiscriminate release of mercury in mining activities threatens the entire aquatic ecosystem of the Amazon Basin.
As China developed economically, pressure on the Chinese river dolphin grew significantly. Industrial and residential waste flowed into the Yangtze. The riverbed was dredged and reinforced with concrete in many locations. Ship traffic multiplied, boats grew in size, and fishermen employed wider and more lethal nets. Noise pollution caused the nearly blind animal to collide with propellers. Stocks of the dolphin's prey declined drastically in the late 20th century, with some fish populations declining to one thousandth of their pre-industrial levels. In the 1950s, the population was estimated at 6,000 animals, but declined rapidly over the subsequent five decades. Only a few hundred were left by 1970. Then the number dropped down to 400 by the 1980s and then to 13 in 1997 when a full-fledged search was conducted. On 13 December 2006, the baiji was declared functionally extinct, after a 45-day search by leading experts in the field failed to find a single specimen. The last verified sighting was in 2004.
As food
Moose are hunted as a game species in many of the countries where they are found. While the flesh has protein levels similar to those of other comparable red meats (e.g. beef, deer and elk), it has a low fat content, and the fat that is present consists of a higher proportion of polyunsaturated fats rather than saturated fats.

...like tender beef, with perhaps more flavour; sometimes like veal"
Cadmium levels are high in moose liver and kidneys, with the result that consumption of these organs from moose more than one year old is prohibited in Finland. Cadmium intake has been found to be elevated amongst all consumers of moose meat, though the meat was found to contribute only slightly to the daily cadmium intake. However the consumption of moose liver or kidneys significantly increased cadmium intake, with the study revealing that heavy consumers of moose organs have a relatively narrow safety margin below the levels which would probably cause adverse health effects.
In the 17th century, based on a question raised by the Bishop of Quebec, the Roman Catholic Church ruled that the beaver was a fish (beaver flesh was a part of the indigenous peoples' diet, prior to the Europeans' arrival) for purposes of dietary law. Therefore, the general prohibition on the consumption of meat on Fridays did not apply to beaver meat. This is similar to the Church's classification of other semiaquatic rodents, such as the capybara and muskrat.


Mammal Hands are a British band from Norwich, consisting of Jordan Smart on saxophone, Nick Smart on piano and Rob Turner on drums.
Description
Mammal Hands formed in Norwich, England, in 2012. They signed to Gondwana Records in 2013 and released their debut album, Animalia, in 2014. Their 2nd album, Floa, came out in 2016, followed quickly by Shadow Work in 2017. Their 4th album, Captured Spirits, was released in 2020 and their fifth studio album, Gift from the Trees, was released 31 March 2023, on Gondwana Records.
On April 26, 2024, the band announced the departure of their original drummer, Jesse Barrett, and subsequently announced that the band would be continuing with Rob Turner on drums.
On February 27, 2026, they released their 6th studio album, Circadia, on Berlin-based label ACT Music.
The band's style combines a broad range of influences, including ambient, jazz, contemporary classical, electronic music, minimalism, folk and world music.
DiscographyStudio albumsEP


Hystrix is a genus of porcupines containing most of the Old World porcupines. Fossils belonging to the genus date back to the late Miocene of Africa.
Hystrix (from Ancient Greek ὕστριξ (hústrix, “porcupine”) was given name by the 18th-century Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus.
Species
Genus Hystrix
Subgenus Hystrix
Hystrix africaeaustralis - Cape porcupine
Hystrix cristata - African crested porcupine
Hystrix indica - Indian crested porcupine
Subgenus Acanthion
Hystrix brachyura - Malayan porcupine or Himalayan crestless porcupine
Hystrix javanica - Sunda porcupine
Subgenus Thecurus
Hystrix crassispinis - thick-spined porcupine
Hystrix pumila - Philippine porcupine
Hystrix sumatrae - Sumatran porcupine
Fossil species
†Hystrix arayanensis - Late Miocene
†Hystrix depereti - Pliocene
†Hystrix kayae - Late Miocene
†Hystrix leucurus - Pleistocene
†Hystrix makapanensis - Late Pliocene-Early Pleistocene
†Hystrix paukensis - Late Miocene-Pliocene
†Hystrix primigenia - Late Miocene-Pliocene
†Hystrix refossa - Pleistocene
†Hystrix suevica - Late Miocene
†Hystrix velunensis - Pliocene


Mammal are an Australian band that formed in March 2006. Mammal rose up the ranks of the Australian music scene very quickly. Their first self-titled EP was recorded soon after the band came together. Their debut live album "Vol:1 The Aural Underground" was recorded just 4 months after the band started touring at a sold-out show at The Evelyn Hotel on 2 February 2007. Mammal also released a single titled "Slaves/Nagasaki in Flames" AA side, featuring 3 songs. Mammal entered the studio on 21 April 2008 to begin recording their debut studio album, The Majority which was released in August 2008. It peaked at No. 51 on the ARIA Albums Chart in early September. Some of the band's songs, including Hell Yeah!, New Breed Judas and Slaves, received regular airplay on Australian radio station Triple J.
History2006
Mammal began in March 2006 when former Full Scale frontman Ezekiel Ox joined up with old friend Pete Williamson (of Pete Murray's Stonemasons) who had already been working on some songs with bass player Nick Adams, the two had needed a vocalist and with Zeke everything came together. The trio soon found drummer Zane Rosanoski and the official Mammal line-up was complete. Mammal began playing all the shows they could very soon after forming, which were very well received by audiences and started to gain a fast-growing fan base. In mid-2006 they entered the Sing Sing Studios to record their self-titled debut EP, which was very popular and the fanbase kept growing.
2007
Mammal continued to play many gigs in 2007 and on 2 February they recorded their debut live album "Vol 1: The Aural Underground" which was released on 1 September. They began to find themselves on the bills at some of the country's biggest music festivals and playing more gigs than ever. They also released their single titled "Slaves/Nagasaki in Flames" which had a live version of "Hollywood Shrine". Mammal began work on material for their debut studio album on 20 November.
2008–2009
The band continued to play many shows at the beginning of 2008 and were fast becoming one of Australia's biggest bands, with a solid reputation as a live band. They performed at the Melbourne "Big Day Out" and they opened for Kiss at their Brisbane show in February. They entered "Sing Sing Studios" on 21 April to begin recording their new studio album, which was released on 30 August 2008. The released album was called The Majority and it debuted at No. 51 on the ARIA Albums chart. and at No. 2 on the independent AIR chart. Their single "Smash the Piñata" was placed on rotation by Triple J. and its accompanying video clip received high rotation on UK TV music channel "Scuzz TV". Mammal also played at Bassinthegrass 2007 and again in 2008 on 24 May. Mammal undertook 3 tours in the last 6 months of 2008 - the first in support of "Smash the Pinata", the first single from the debut album, the second an album launch tour, and the third, and final, more extensive run including some regional/coastal shows as a proper tour for "The Majority". Mammal finished 2008 by winning Best Live Band at the Music Oz awards for independent bands. The band played at the 2009 Peaches and Cream Festival on the Murray River. In 2009, Mammal performed at all Australian dates on the Big Day Out Festival tour, undertook several national tours, including a two-week UK tour with sold-out shows in London, Manchester and Glasgow. They were writing material for a second studio album before later disbanding.
A live CD/DVD, "Vol 2: Systematic/Automatic" was released on 5 September, and were planning to tour the UK with The Answer, famed for touring with AC/DC.
Break up
On October 31, 2009, Mammal announced via newsletter that all touring had been canceled and they had split up, releasing the statement: "Due to long standing personal, political, musical and business differences, Mammal has decided it cannot continue and is no more..."
It is believed that a fan who broke the drum skin of the kick drum during their set at the Dogs Bollix, Auckland, led to turmoil within the band, leading to this break up.
Reunion (2017–present)
Mammal released a statement on 8 August 2017 announcing that they were playing their first show after almost 8 years scheduled for Fri, 27 October 2017 in Melbourne. Following the sold-out performance at Melbourne's Max Watts, the band announced a small tour for late December.
In May 2018, Mammal released their first new material since 2009, the digital double-A side single "Community". A film clip was also released for the title track, and the song "Virtue Signalling", which had been played live on the band's December tour the previous year, was also released. The band also announced a tour to take place from June through to September.
Related projects
Ezekiel Ox plays in Over-Reactor, Full Scale, and Superheist as well as leading his solo rock project "Ezekiel Ox".
Pete Williamson and Zane Rosanoski formed a blues-rock band, Black Devil Yard Boss, with Michael "Big D" Davids on bass.
Nick Adams joined up with Hugo Tremayne, formerly of K-Oscillate, and Ben Ellingworth, formerly of MM9, in the electronic/rock band, Sub Atari Knives. He also plays in Warflags, Machine Gun Tongues and is session bass player for Clairy Browne.
Zane Rosanoski plays in East York.
Line up
Ezekiel Ox – vocals
David Bleus – guitar
Zane Rosanoski – drums, percussion
Kade Turner – bass guitar
Former members

David Ward - drums
Nick Adams – bass guitar
DiscographyStudio albumsLive albumsExtended playsSingles


A state mammal is the official mammal of a U.S. state as designated by a state's legislature. The first column of the table is for those denoted as the state mammal, and the second shows the state marine mammals. Animals with more specific designations are also listed. Many states also have separately officially designated state birds, state fish, state butterflies, state reptiles, and other animals. Listed separately are state dogs and state horses.
State mammals
Key: Years in parentheses denote the year of adoption by the state's legislature.


Mammalia is a class of vertebrate animals. Members of this class are called mammals. It comprises 6,102 extant species, which are grouped into 163 families, themselves grouped into 27 orders in 3 major divisions. These orders can contain between one and thousands of species, grouped into genera and then into families. Mammals are characterized by the presence of mammary glands which in females produce milk for feeding their young, a neocortex region of the brain, and fur or hair. Mammals are native to all major land masses and the oceans, and can be found worldwide. They live in every habitat on Earth. The basic mammalian body type is quadrupedal, with most mammals using four limbs for terrestrial locomotion, but in some the limbs are adapted for life at sea, in the air, in trees or underground. They range in length from Kitti's hog-nosed bat, at 2 cm (1 in) with no tail, to the blue whale, at 32.6 m (107 ft) long, including tail.
The three major divisions of mammals are the infraclass Marsupialia, containing the marsupial animals wherein the young are carried in a pouch; the infraclass Placentalia, for which the fetus is carried in the uterus, and the order Monotremata, containing egg-laying species. Marsupialia contains 333 species, Monotremata contains 5, and Placentalia contains the vast majority of extant mammals at 5,763 species. The majority of mammals, in terms of number of species, are in the two largest orders: Rodentia, or rodents, with 2,360 species, and Chiroptera, or bats, with 1,513. The exact organization of the species is not fixed, with many recent proposals made based on molecular phylogenetic analysis. In addition to the extant mammals, 72 species have been driven extinct since 1500 CE.
Conventions
The author citation for the species or genus is given after the scientific name; parentheses around the author citation indicate that this was not the original taxonomic placement. Range maps are provided wherever possible; if a range map is not available, a description of the collective range of species in that genera is provided. Ranges are based on the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species unless otherwise noted. All extinct genera or species listed alongside extant species went extinct after 1500 CE, and are indicated by a dagger symbol "†".
Classification
The class Mammalia consists of 6,103 extant species grouped into 1,308 genera belonging to 163 families. This does not include hybrid species or extinct prehistoric species. Modern molecular studies indicate that the 163 families can be grouped into 27 orders; these orders are divided into 3 major groupings: Marsupialia, an infraclass containing 7 orders of mammals which give birth to relatively undeveloped young that often reside in a pouch located on their mothers' abdomen for a time; Placentalia, an infraclass containing 19 orders of mammals that have fetuses that are carried in the uterus, and Monotremata, an order of egg-laying mammals. Within these groupings, the orders are organized into named clades, and some of these orders are subdivided into named suborders. An additional 72 species have been driven extinct since 1500 CE: 15 in Marsupialia and 57 in Placentalia.
Mammals
The following classification is based on the taxonomy described by Mammal Species of the World (2005), with augmentation by generally accepted proposals made since using molecular phylogenetic analysis, as supported by both the IUCN and the American Society of Mammalogists.
Infraclass Marsupialia
Marsupialia is one of the three main divisions of mammals, and contains 334 extant species. It is distinguished from the other two groups in that marsupials give birth to relatively undeveloped young that often reside in a pouch located on their mothers' abdomen for a certain amount of time. It is divided into two groupings: the superorder Australidelphia and Ameridelphia, which was previously considered a superorder but is now regarded as a paraphyletic group. Ameridelphia contains 99 extant species in 2 orders, each containing a single family: Didelphimorphia, or the opossums, and Paucituberculata, or the shrew opossums. Australidelphia contains 235 extant species in 18 families, grouped into 5 orders: Dasyuromorphia, or the Australian carnivorous marsupials; Diprotodontia, or the kangaroos and possums; Microbiotheria, or the monito del montes; and Notoryctemorphia, or the marsupial moles; and Peramelemorphia, or the bandicoots and bilbies. One additional species in Ameridelphia and twelve in Australidelphia were driven extinct in modern times.
AmeridelphiaDidelphimorphia
Members of the Didelphimorphia order are called didelphimorphs or opossums. They are found in North and South America, Australia, and southeastern Asia and are omnivorous, eating insects, small vertebrates, and vegetation. Didelphimorphia comprises a single family of 92 extant species in 18 genera. One additional species was driven extinct in modern times.
Paucituberculata
Members of the Paucituberculata order are called paucituberculatans or shrew opossums. They are found in western South America and are omnivorous, eating larva, small vertebrates, and vegetation. Paucituberculata comprises a single family of seven extant species in three genera.
Superorder AustralidelphiaDasyuromorphia
Members of the Dasyuromorphia order are called dasyuromorphs or Australian carnivorous marsupials and include the marsupial shrews and the numbat. They are found in Australia and New Guinea and are carnivorous, eating a wide variety of vertebrates and invertebrates. Dasyuromorphia comprises 2 extant families containing 71 extant species in 17 genera. Two additional species, one of which comprised an entire family, were driven extinct in modern times.
Diprotodontia
Members of the Diprotodontia order are called diprotodonts and include kangaroos, wallabies, potoroos, possums, the koala, and wombats. They are found in Australia and southeastern Asia and are omnivorous, but primarily eat a wide variety of vegetation and invertebrates. Diprotodontia comprises 11 families containing 139 extant species in 39 genera. These families are divided between three suborders: Macropodiformes, containing the kangaroos, wallabies, and potoroos; Phalangeriformes, or the possums; and Vombatiformes, or the koala and wombats. Nine additional kangaroo and potoroo species were driven extinct in modern times.
Microbiotheria
Members of the Microbiotheria order are called microbiotherians or monito del montes. They are found in southwestern South America and eat vegetation and invertebrates. Microbiotheria comprises a single family containing two extant species in a single genus.
Notoryctemorphia
Members of the Notoryctemorphia order are called notoryctemorphs or marsupial moles. They are found in central Australia and eat insects and seeds. Notoryctemorphia comprises a single family containing two extant species in a single genus.
Peramelemorphia
Members of the Peramelemorphia order are called peramelemorphs and include bandicoots and bilbies. They are found in Australia and New Guinea and are omnivorous. Peramelemorphia comprises two families containing 19 extant species in 7 genera. Three additional species, including the sole member of a third family, were driven extinct in modern times.
Infraclass Placentalia
Placentalia is one of the three main divisions of mammals, and contains the vast majority of extant species with 5,763 species. It is distinguished from the other two groups in that the placental animals have fetuses that are carried in the uterus. It is divided into four superorders: Afrotheria, Euarchontoglires, Laurasiatheria, and Xenarthra.
Afrotheria contains 87 extant species in 9 families, grouped into 6 orders: Afrosoricida, the golden moles and tenrecs; Hyracoidea, or hyraxes; Macroscelidea, or elephant shrews; Proboscidea, or elephants; Sirenia, or dugongs and manatees; and Tubulidentata, or aardvarks. Euarchontoglires contains 2,982 extant species in 56 families, grouped into 5 orders: Scandentia, or the treeshrews; Dermoptera, or the colugos; Lagomorpha, containing hares and pikas; Primates, containing monkeys and apes; and Rodentia, or rodents. Laurasiatheria contains 2,665 species in 69 families, grouped into 6 orders: Artiodactyla, containing deer, cattle, pigs, and whales; Carnivora, containing wolves, otters, seals, cats, and mongooses; Chiroptera, or bats; Eulipotyphla, containing hedgehogs, shrews, and moles; Perissodactyla, containing horses, tapirs, and rhinoceroses; and Pholidota, or pangolins. Xenarthra contains 31 species in 6 families, grouped into 2 orders: Cingulata, or armadillos, and Pilosa, the sloths and anteaters. One additional species in Afrotheria, 38 in Euarchontoglires, and 18 in Laurasiatheria were driven extinct in modern times.
Superorder AfrotheriaAfrosoricida
Members of the Afrosoricida order are called afrosoricids and include golden moles, otter shrews, and tenrecs. They are found in Sub-Saharan Africa and eat invertebrates, fish, amphibians, lizards, and vegetation. Afrosoricida comprises three families of 55 extant species in 20 genera. These families are divided between two suborders: Chrysochloridea, or the golden moles, and Tenrecomorpha, containing the otter shrews and tenrecs.
Hyracoidea
Members of the Hyracoidea order are called hyracoids or hyraxes. They are found in Africa and the Middle East and eat a variety of vegetation. Hyracoidea comprises a single family of five extant species in three genera.
Macroscelidea
Members of the Macroscelidea order are called macroscelids or elephant shrews. They are found in Africa and eat ants and termites, as well as other insects. Macroscelidea comprises a single family of 19 extant species in 6 genera.
Proboscidea
Members of the Proboscidea order are called proboscids or elephants. They are found in Sub-Saharan Africa and southern and southeastern Asia and eat grass, bark, roots, leaves, shrubs, and fruit. Proboscidea comprises a single family of three extant species in two genera, in the suborder Elephantiformes.
Sirenia
Members of the Sirenia order are called sirenians or sea cows and include dugongs and manatees. They are found in the Indian, Pacific, and western Atlantic Oceans and in South American and western African rivers, and eat aquatic vegetation and algaes, as well as fish and invertebrates. Sirenia comprises two families of four extant species in two genera. Additionally, a single species of dugong was driven extinct in modern times.
Tubulidentata
Members of the Tubulidentata order are called tubulidentatans or aardvarks. They are found in Africa and eat termites, as well as other insects and fruit. Tubulidentata is composed of a single species.
Superorder EuarchontogliresScandentia
Members of the Scandentia order are called scandentians or treeshrews. They are found in India and southeastern Asia and eat insects and fruit, as well as small animals and plants. Scandentia comprises 2 families of 23 extant species in 4 genera.
Dermoptera
Members of the Dermoptera order are called dermopterans or colugos. They are found in southeastern Asia and eat leaves. Dermoptera comprises a single family of two extant species in two genera.
Lagomorpha
Members of the Lagomorpha order are called lagomorphs and include hares, rabbits, and pikas. They are found worldwide and eat a variety of plant material. Lagomorpha comprises 2 families of 93 extant species in 12 genera.
Primates
Members of the Primates order are called primates and include monkeys and apes. Excluding humans, they are found in Central and South America, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Asia, and eat a variety of plant material, invertebrates, and small vertebrates.  Primates comprises 16 families of 505 extant species in 81 genera. These families are divided between two suborders: Haplorhini, containing the apes, gibbons, New World monkeys, and tarsiers, and Strepsirrhini, containing the lemurs, galagos, and lorises.
Rodentia
Members of the Rodentia order are called rodents. They are found worldwide, and eat a wide variety of plant material and invertebrates, with some species eating small vertebrates or carrion. Rodentia comprises 35 families of 2,360 extant species—about 40% of all mammal species—in 513 genera. These families are grouped into five suborders: Anomaluromorpha, containing the scaly-tailed squirrels and springhares; Castorimorpha, containing breavers, gophers, and kangaroo rats; Hystricomorpha, containing mole-rats, cavies, tuco-tucos, agoutis, and New World spiny rats and porcupines; Myomorpha, containing a wide variety of mice and rats; and Sciuromorpha, containing dormice and squirrels. Additionally, 38 species have been driven to extinction in modern times.
Superorder LaurasiatheriaArtiodactyla
Members of the Artiodactyla order are called artiodactyls or even-toed ungulates, and include deer, cattle, pigs, camels, whales, and dolphins. They are found worldwide on land and in oceans, and eat a wide variety of plant material, fish, and other marine animals. Artiodactyla comprises 24 families of 349 extant species in 133 genera. These families are grouped into four suborders: Ruminantia, containing deer, cattle, goats, a giraffes; Suina, containing pigs and peccaries; Tylopoda, containing camels and llamas; and Whippomorpha, containing whales, dolphins, and hippopotomuses. Three additional species have been driven to extinction in modern times.
Carnivora
Members of the Carnivora order are called carnivorans, and include dogs, bears, raccoons, weasels, seals, cats, hyenas, and mongooses. They are found worldwide on land an in oceans, and are omnivorous, with some species predominately eating plant material or aquatic animals. Carnivora comprises 16 families of 291 extant species in 131 genera. These families are grouped into two suborders: Caniformia, containing dogs, foxes, bears, raccoons, skunks, weasels, and seals, and Feliformia, containing cats, hyenas, mongooses, and civets. Six additional species have been driven to extinction in modern times.
Chiroptera
Members of the Chiroptera order are called chiropterans or bats. They are found worldwide, and predominately eat insects, with some species also eating fruit or fish. Chiroptera comprises 21 families of 1,513 extant species—about 20% of all mammal species—in 237 genera. These families are grouped into two suborders: Yangochiroptera, containing sheath-tailed, leaf-nosed, free-tailed, and vesper bats, and Yinpterochiroptera, containing Old World leaf-nosed, fruit, and horseshoe bats. Nine additional species have been driven to extinction in modern times.
Eulipotyphla
Members of the Eulipotyphla order are called eulipotyphlans and include hedgehogs, shrews, and moles. They are found worldwide, and predominately eat insects, small vertebrates, and vegetation. Eulipotyphla comprises 4 families of 485 extant species in 53 genera. One additional species has been driven to extinction in modern times.
Perissodactyla
Members of the Perissodactyla order are called perissodactyls or odd-toed ungulates, and include rhinoceroses, tapirs, and horses. They are found worldwide, and eat a variety of vegetation. Perissodactyla comprises 3 families of 18 extant species in 6 genera. These families are grouped into two suborders: Ceratomorpha, containing rhinoceroses and tapirs, and Hippomorpha, or horses.
Pholidota
Members of the Pholidota order are called pholidotans or pangolins. They are found in Sub-Saharan Africa and southern and southeastern Asia, and eat ants and termites, as well as other insects. Pholidota comprises a single family of eight extant species in three genera.
Superorder XenarthraCingulata
Members of the Cingulata order are called cingulates or armadillos. They are found in South America and North America, and eat insects, other invertebrates, small reptiles, amphibians, and carrion. Cingulata comprises 2 families of 22 extant species in 9 genera.
Pilosa
Members of the Pilosa order are called pilosans and include sloths and anteaters. They are found in Mexico, Central America, and South America, and the sloths eat leaves, twigs, and fruit, while the anteaters eat ants, termites, and other insects. Cingulata comprises thee families of nine extant species in four genera. These families are grouped into two suborders: Folivora, or sloths, and Vermilingua, or anteaters.
Monotremata
Monotremata is the smallest of the three main divisions of mammals, containing only five extant species. It is distinguished from other mammals in that the monotremes are egg-laying rather than bearing live young, but, like all mammals, the female monotremes nurse their young with milk. Unlike the other two divisions, it is considered an order rather than an infraclass, and in turn contains two families of extant species grouped together in the superfamily Ornithorhynchoidea: Ornithorhynchidae, containing only the platypus, and Tachyglossidae, containing four species of echidna in two genera. Monotremes are found in Australia and New Guinea and are carnivorous, eating insects, worms, shrimp, tadpoles, and small fish.


The Mammal Neogene zones or MN zones are system of biostratigraphic zones in the stratigraphic record used to correlate mammal-bearing fossil localities of the Neogene period of Europe. It consists of seventeen consecutive zones (numbered MN 1 through MN 18; MN 7 and 8 have been joined into MN 7/8 zone) defined through reference faunas, well-known sites that other localities can be correlated with. MN 1 is the earliest zone, and MN 18 is the most recent. The MN zones are complementary with the MP zones in the Paleogene.

The zones are as follows:


The St Bathans mammal is a currently unnamed extinct primitive mammal from the Early Miocene (Altonian, 18.7 Ma to 15.9 Ma) of New Zealand. A member of the St Bathans fauna, it is notable for being a late-surviving "archaic" mammal species, neither a placental nor a marsupial. It also provides evidence that flightless fully terrestrial mammals did in fact once live in Zealandia. This is in contrast to modern New Zealand, where bats, cetaceans and seals are the only non-introduced mammals in the otherwise bird-dominated faunas.
Discovery
The St Bathans mammal is currently represented by three specimens in Te Papa: NMNZ S.40958, NMNZ S.41866, and NMNZ S.42214, composed of two lower jaw fragments and a femur respectively. It was part of an assemblage of fossils recovered in St Bathans in 1978, in what would later be understood to be the Bannockburn Formation (Manuherikia Group), and first described in 2006.
Description
Like most small mammal fossils, the St Bathans mammal material is rather incomplete, with only a lower jaw fragment and femur initially being reported. It was later suggested that the femur may belong to a bat. In 2024, it was reported that additional elements had been recovered including a molar and a premolar tooth, additional mandible fragments, an undoubtedly non-bat femur shaft, as well as other postcranial remains, with it being suggested that at least two distinct species were present.
The lower jaws are toothless, though the presence of deep tooth sockets suggests that they were toothed in life and that the teeth were lost post-mortem. They bear a long fused mandibular symphysis, an evidently procumbent lower incisor, and five additional sockets that imply a dental formula of one incisor, one canine and two double-rooted premolars.
The femur possesses a round head and poorly defined neck, oriented slightly dorsomedially with respect to the long axis of the shaft, and separated from the greater trochanter by a marked trough. The alignment of the femur in life is hard to ascertain, but it is thought that the animal had a semi-sprawling stance, more abducted than in therian mammals but nowhere near as much as in monotremes.
Phylogeny
Because of the incomplete material, it is very hard to understand the position of this taxon within Mammaliaformes as a whole. Worthy et al. 2006 tentatively deemed the St Bathans mammal as a theriiform, being more derived than morganucodontans, eutriconodonts and monotremes but not as much as multituberculates, on the basis of its femoral anatomy. As the phylogeny of non-therian mammals has undergone multiple shifts since its description, new studies might be necessary.
Ecology
The Bannockburn Formation depicts a warm temperate or subtropical lakeside environment, surrounded by herbaceous peat–swamps. Casuarinas, araucarias, podocarps, eucalypts, palm trees and southern beeches are among the various plant species known to have grown here. As today, the local vertebrate fauna was dominated by birds: early moas and adzebills are represented by unnamed species, as are various representatives of groups such as waterfowl, flamingos, rails, herons, strigopoidean parrots and even an early kiwi, Proapteryx. However, unlike modern New Zealand it also had a varied herpetofauna: besides an early tuatara, the St Bathans fauna also includes meiolaniid and pleurodire turtles and possibly mekosuchine crocodylids and snakes.
Besides the St Bathans mammal, this fauna also includes mystacine bats, a group still present in modern New Zealand. Like the modern species, these were probably terrestrial foragers, the same general ecological niche proposed for the St Bathans mammal. Other bats, including a vesper bat and several currently unclassified species, also existed.


Mammal Review is a zoology journal published by Wiley-Blackwell on behalf of The Mammal Society. Covering all areas of mammalian biology, ecology, physiology, behaviour, biogeography and conservation biology, the journal is edited by Dr Robyn Grant, with Dr Antonio Uzal Fernandez as Assistant Editor. The journal has a current impact factor of 5.373, which corresponds to a ranking of 32/174 (Ecology) and 5/177 (Zoology).


Mammal Research is a quarterly peer-reviewed scientific journal published by Springer Science+Business Media in partnership with the Mammal Research Institute of the Polish Academy of Sciences. The editor-in-chief is Karol Zub. The journal was first  published under the name Acta Theriologica in January 1955. It retained this name until the publication of its 60th volume in 2015, at which time it took on the name Mammal Research. August Dehnel, Polish professor of zoology, was the journal's founder. It was originally published through the Institute of Zoology of the Polish Academy of Sciences, though this was supplanted by the Mammal Research Institute in 1958. Publication transferred to Springer in January 2011.
Abstracting and indexing
The journal is abstracted and indexed in:

According to the Journal Citation Reports, the journal has a 2024 impact factor of 1.6.


Ungulates are members of the diverse clade Euungulata, which primarily consists of large mammals with hooves. Once part of the taxon "Ungulata" along with paenungulates and tubulidentates, as well as several extinct taxa, "Ungulata" has since been determined to be a polyphyletic grouping based on molecular data. As a result, true ungulates have since been reclassified to the newer clade Euungulata in 2001 within the clade Laurasiatheria, while Paenungulata and Tubulidentata have been reclassified to the distant clade Afrotheria. Alternatively, some authors use the name Ungulata to designate the same clade as Euungulata.
Living ungulates are divided into two orders:

Odd-toed Perissodactyla including equines, rhinoceroses, and tapirs.
Even-toed Artiodactyla including cattle, antelope, pigs, giraffes, camels, sheep, deer, and hippopotamuses, among others.
Cetaceans such as whales, dolphins, and porpoises are also classified as artiodactyls, although they do not have hooves.
Most terrestrial ungulates use the hoofed tips of their toes to support their body weight while standing or moving. Two other orders of ungulates, Notoungulata and Litopterna, both native to South America, became extinct at the end of the Pleistocene, around 12,000 years ago.
The term means, roughly, "being hoofed" or "hoofed animal". As a descriptive term, "ungulate" normally excludes cetaceans as they do not possess most of the typical morphological characteristics of other ungulates, but they were also descended from early artiodactyls. Ungulates are typically herbivorous and many employ specialized gut bacteria to enable them to digest cellulose, though some members may deviate from this: several species of pigs and the extinct entelodonts are omnivorous, while cetaceans are carnivorous.
Etymology
Ungulate is from the Late Latin adjective ungulatus 'hoofed', from ungula 'hoof', a diminutive of unguis 'nail' (finger nail; toe nail).
ClassificationsHistory
Euungulata is a clade (or in some taxonomies, a grand order) of mammals. The two extant orders of ungulates are the Perissodactyla (odd-toed ungulates) and Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates). Hyracoidea (hyraxes), Sirenia (sea cows, dugongs and manatees), Proboscidea (elephants) and Tubulidentata (aardvarks) were in the past grouped within the clade "Ungulata", later found to be a polyphyletic and invalid. The three orders of Paenungulata are considered a clade and grouped in the Afrotheria clade, along with Tubulidentata, while Euungulata is grouped under the Laurasiatheria clade.
In 2009, morphological and molecular work found that aardvarks, hyraxes, sea cows, and elephants were more closely related to each other and to sengis, tenrecs, and golden moles than to the perissodactyls and artiodactyls, and form the clade Afrotheria. Elephants, sea cows, and hyraxes were grouped together in the clade Paenungulata, while the aardvark has been considered as either a close relative to them or a close relative to sengis in the clade Afroinsectiphilia. This is a striking example of convergent evolution.
There is some dispute as to whether this smaller Euungulata is a cladistic (evolution-based) group, or merely a phenetic group (form taxon) or folk taxon (similar, but not necessarily related). Some studies have indeed found the mesaxonian ungulates and paraxonian ungulates to form a monophyletic lineage, closely related to either the Ferae (the carnivorans and the pangolins) in the clade Fereuungulata or to the bats. Other studies found the two orders not that closely related, as some place the perissodactyls as close relatives to bats and Ferae in Pegasoferae and others place the artiodactyls as close relatives to bats.
Taxonomy
Below is a simplified taxonomy (assuming that ungulates do indeed form a natural grouping) with the extant families, in order of the relationships. Keep in mind that there were still some grey areas of conflict, such as the case with the relationship between the pecoran families and the baleen whale families. See each family for the relationships of the species as well as the controversies in their respective articles.

Euungulata
Perissodactyla (Mesaxonian ungulates)
Hippomorpha
Equidae: Horses, asses and zebras
Ceratomorpha
Tapiridae: Tapirs
Rhinocerotidae: Rhinoceroses
Artiodactyla (= Cetartiodactyla) (Paraxonian ungulates)
Tylopoda
Camelidae: Camels and llamas
Artiofabula
Suina
Tayassuidae: Peccaries
Suidae: Pigs
Cetruminantia
Ruminantia
Tragulidae: Chevrotains
Cervoidea
Antilocapridae: Pronghorn
Giraffidae: Giraffes and okapi
Cervidae: Deer
Moschidae: Musk deer
Bovidae: Cattle and antelopes
Whippomorpha
Hippopotamidae: Hippopotamuses
Cetacea
Mysticeti
Balaenidae: Bowhead and right whales
Cetotheriidae: Pygmy right whale
Balaenopteridae: Rorquals
Odontoceti
Physeteroidea
Physeteridae: Sperm whale
Kogiidae: Lesser sperm whales
Platanistoidea
Platanistidae: Indian river dolphins
Ziphioidea
Ziphiidae: Beaked whales
Lipotoidea
Lipotidae: Baiji (functionally extinct)
Inioidea
Iniidae: Amazonian river dolphins
Pontoporiidae: La Plata dolphin
Delphinoidea
Monodontidae: Beluga and narwhal
Phocoenidae: Porpoises
Delphinidae: Oceanic dolphins
Phylogeny
Below is the general consensus of the phylogeny of the ungulate families.
Evolutionary history
Perissodactyla and Artiodactyla include the majority of large land mammals. These two groups first appeared during the late Paleocene, rapidly spreading to a wide variety of species on numerous continents, and have developed in parallel since that time. Some scientists believed that modern ungulates were descended from an evolutionary grade of mammals known as the condylarths. The earliest known member of this group may have been the tiny Protungulatum, a mammal that co-existed with the last of non-avian dinosaurs 66 million years ago. However, many authorities do not consider it a true placental, let alone an ungulate. The enigmatic dinoceratans were among the first large herbivorous mammals, although their exact relationship with other mammals is still debated with one of the theories being that they might just be distant relatives to living ungulates; the most recent study recovers them as within the true ungulate assemblage, closest to Carodnia.
In Australia, the recently extinct marsupial Chaeropus ("pig-footed bandicoot") also developed hooves similar to those of artiodactyls, an example of convergent evolution.
Perissodactyl evolution
Perissodactyls were thought to have evolved from the Phenacodontidae, small, sheep-sized animals that were already showing signs of anatomical features that their descendants would inherit (the reduction of digit I and V for example). By the start of the Eocene, 55 million years ago (Mya), they had diversified and spread out to occupy several continents. Horses and tapirs both evolved in North America; rhinoceroses appear to have developed in Asia from tapir-like animals and then colonised the Americas during the middle Eocene (about 45 Mya). Of the approximately 15 families, only three survive (McKenna and Bell, 1997; Hooker, 2005). These families were very diverse in form and size; they included the enormous brontotheres and the bizarre chalicotheres. The largest perissodactyl, an Asian rhinoceros called Paraceratherium, reached 15 tonnes (17 tons), more than twice the weight of an elephant.
It has been found in a cladistic study that the anthracobunids and the desmostylians – two lineages that have been previously classified as Afrotherians (more specifically closer to elephants) – have been classified as a clade that is closely related to the perissodactyls. The desmostylians were large amphibious quadrupeds with massive limbs and a short tail. They grew to 1.8 metres (6 ft) in length and were thought to have weighed more than 200 kilograms (440 lb). Their fossils were known from the northern Pacific Rim, from southern Japan through Russia, the Aleutian Islands and the Pacific coast of North America to the southern tip of Baja California. Their dental and skeletal form suggests desmostylians were aquatic herbivores dependent on littoral habitats. Their name refers to their highly distinctive molars, in which each cusp was modified into hollow columns, so that a typical molar would have resembled a cluster of pipes, or in the case of worn molars, volcanoes. They were the only marine mammals to have gone extinct.
The South American meridiungulates contain the somewhat tapir-like pyrotheres and astrapotheres, the mesaxonic litopterns and the diverse notoungulates. As a whole, meridiungulates were said to have evolved from animals like Hyopsodus. For a while their relationships with other ungulates were a mystery. Some paleontologists have even challenged the monophyly of Meridiungulata by suggesting that the pyrotheres may be more closely related to other mammals, such as Embrithopoda (an African order that were related to elephants) than to other South American ungulates. A recent study based on bone collagen has found that at least litopterns and the notoungulates were closely related to the perissodactyls.
The oldest known fossils assigned to Equidae date from the early Eocene, 54 million years ago. They had been assigned to the genus Hyracotherium, but the type species of that genus is now considered not a member of this family, but the other species have been split off into different genera. These early Equidae were fox-sized animals with three toes on the hind feet, and four on the front feet. They were herbivorous browsers on relatively soft plants, and were already adapted for running. The complexity of their brains suggest that they already were alert and intelligent animals. Later species reduced the number of toes, and developed teeth more suited for grinding up grass and other tough plant food.
Rhinocerotoids diverged from other perissodactyls by the early Eocene. Fossils of Hyrachyus eximus found in North America date to this period. This small hornless ancestor resembled a tapir or small horse more than a rhino. Three families, sometimes grouped together as the superfamily Rhinocerotoidea, evolved in the late Eocene: Hyracodontidae, Amynodontidae and Rhinocerotidae, thus creating an explosion of diversity unmatched for a while until environmental changes drastically eliminated several species.
The first tapirids, such as Heptodon, appeared in the early Eocene. They appeared very similar to modern forms, but were about half the size, and lacked the proboscis. The first true tapirs appeared in the Oligocene. By the Miocene, such genera as Miotapirus were almost indistinguishable from the extant species. Asian and American tapirs were believed to have diverged around 20 to 30 million years ago; and tapirs migrated from North America to South America around 3 million years ago, as part of the Great American Interchange.
Perissodactyls were the dominant group of large terrestrial browsers right through the Oligocene. However, the rise of grasses in the Miocene (about 20 Mya) saw a major change: the artiodactyl species with their more complex stomachs were better able to adapt to a coarse, low-nutrition diet, and soon rose to prominence. Nevertheless, many perissodactyl species survived and prospered until the late Pleistocene (about 10,000 years ago) when they faced the pressure of human hunting and habitat change.
Artiodactyl evolution
The artiodactyls were thought to have evolved from a small group of condylarths, Arctocyonidae, which were unspecialized, superficially raccoon-like to bear-like omnivores from the Early Paleocene (about 65 to 60 million years ago). They had relatively short limbs lacking specializations associated with their relatives (e.g. reduced side digits, fused bones, and hooves), and long, heavy tails. Their primitive anatomy makes it unlikely that they were able to run down prey, but with their powerful proportions, claws, and long canines, they may have been able to overpower smaller animals in surprise attacks. Evidently these mammals soon evolved into two separate lineages: the mesonychians and the artiodactyls.

The first artiodactyls looked like today's chevrotains or pigs: small, short-legged creatures that ate leaves and the soft parts of plants. By the Late Eocene (46 million years ago), the three modern suborders had already developed: Suina (the pig group); Tylopoda (the camel group); and Ruminantia (the goat and cattle group). Nevertheless, artiodactyls were far from dominant at that time: the perissodactyls were much more successful and far more numerous. Artiodactyls survived in niche roles, usually occupying marginal habitats, and it is presumably at that time that they developed their complex digestive systems, which allowed them to survive on lower-grade food. While most artiodactyls were taking over the niches left behind by several extinct perissodactyls, one lineage of artiodactyls began to venture out into the seas.
Cetacean evolution
The traditional theory of cetacean evolution was that cetaceans were related to the mesonychian. These animals had unusual triangular teeth very similar to those of primitive cetaceans. This is why scientists long believed that cetaceans evolved from a form of mesonychian. Today, many scientists believe cetaceans evolved from the same stock that gave rise to hippopotamuses. This hypothesized ancestral group likely split into two branches around 54 million years ago. One branch would evolve into cetaceans, possibly beginning about 52 million years ago with the proto-whale Pakicetus and other early cetacean ancestors collectively known as Archaeoceti, which eventually underwent aquatic adaptation into the completely aquatic cetaceans. The other branch became the anthracotheres, a large family of four-legged beasts, the earliest of whom in the late Eocene would have resembled skinny hippopotamuses with comparatively small and narrow heads. All branches of the anthracotheres, except that which evolved into Hippopotamidae, became extinct during the Pliocene without leaving any descendants.

The family Raoellidae is said to be the closest artiodactyl family to the cetaceans. Consequentially, new theories in cetacean evolution hypothesize that whales and their ancestors escaped predation, not competition, by slowly adapting to the ocean.
Characteristics
Ungulates are in high diversity in response to sexual selection and ecological events; most ungulates lack a collar bone. Terrestrial ungulates are for the most part herbivores, with some of them being grazers. However, there are exceptions to this, as pigs, peccaries, hippos, and duikers are known to have an omnivorous diet. Cetaceans are the only modern ungulates that have a carnivorous diet; baleen whales consume significantly smaller animals in relation to their body size, such as small species of fish and krill; toothed whales, depending on the species, can consume a wide range of species: squid, fish, sharks, and other species of mammals such as seals and other whales. In terms of ecosystem, ungulates have colonized all corners of the planet, from mountains to the ocean depths; grasslands to deserts and some have been domesticated by humans.
Anatomy
Ungulates have developed specialized adaptations, especially in the areas of cranial appendages, dentition, and leg morphology, including the modification of the astragalus (one of the ankle bones at the end of the lower leg) with a short, robust head.
Hooves
The hoof is the tip of the toe of an ungulate mammal, strengthened by a thick horny (keratin) covering. The hoof consists of a hard or rubbery sole, and a hard wall formed by a thick nail rolled around the tip of the toe. Both the sole and the edge of the hoof wall normally bear the weight of the animal. Hooves grow continuously, and are constantly worn down by use. In most modern ungulates, the radius and ulna are fused along the length of the forelimb; early ungulates, such as the arctocyonids, did not share this unique skeletal structure. The fusion of the radius and ulna prevents an ungulate from rotating its forelimb. Since this skeletal structure has no specific function in ungulates, it is considered a homologous characteristic that ungulates share with other mammals. This trait would have been passed down from a common ancestor. While the colloquial names for the two orders of ungulates were based on the number of toes of their members ("odd-toed" for the perissodactyls and "even-toed" for the terrestrial artiodactyls), it is not an accurate reason for grouping them. Tapirs have four toes in the front, yet they were members of the "odd-toed" order; peccaries and modern cetaceans were members of the "even-toed" order, yet peccaries have three toes in the front and whales were an extreme example as they have flippers instead of hooves. Scientists had classified them according to the distribution of their weight to their toes.
Perissodactyls have a mesaxonic foot, meaning that the weight is distributed on the third toe on all legs thanks to the plane symmetry of their feet. There has been a reduction of toes from the common ancestor, with the classic example being horses with their single hooves. This gave rise to an alternative name for the perissodactyls: the nearly obsolete label Mesaxonia. Perissodactyls were not the only lineage of mammals to have evolved this trait; the meridiungulates have evolved mesaxonic feet numerous times.
Terrestrial artiodactyls have a paraxonic foot, meaning that the weight is distributed on the third and the fourth toe on all legs. The majority of these mammals have cloven hooves, with two smaller ones known as the dewclaws that are located further up on the foot. The earliest cetaceans (the archaeocetes) also had this characteristic in the addition of also having both an astragalus and cuboid bone in the ankle, which were further diagnostic traits of artiodactyls.

In modern cetaceans, the front limbs had become pectoral fins and the hind parts were internal and reduced. Occasionally, the genes that code for longer extremities cause a modern cetacean to develop miniature legs (known as atavism). The main method of moving is an up-and-down motion with the tail fin, called the fluke, which is used for propulsion, while the pectoral fins together with the entire tail section provide directional control. All modern cetaceans still retain their digits despite the external appearance suggesting otherwise.
Teeth
Most ungulates have developed reduced canine teeth and specialized molars, including bunodont (low, rounded cusps) and hypsodont (high crowned) teeth. The development of hypsodonty has been of particular interest as this adaptation was strongly associated with the spread of grasslands during the Miocene about 25 million years ago. As forest biomes declined, grasslands spread, opening new niches for mammals. Many ungulates switched from browsing diets to grazing diets, and possibly driven by abrasive silica in grass, hypsodonty became common. However, recent evidence ties the evolution of hypsodonty to open, gritty habitats and not the grass itself. This is termed the "Grit, not grass hypothesis".
Some ungulates completely lack upper incisors and instead have a dental pad to assist in browsing. It can be found in camels, ruminants, and some toothed whales; modern baleen whales were remarkable in that they have baleen instead to filter out the krill from the water. On the other end of the spectrum, teeth have evolved as weapons or sexual display as seen in pigs and peccaries, some species of deer, musk deer, hippopotamuses, beaked whales, and the narwhal, with its long canine tooth.
Cranial appendages
Ungulates have evolved a variety of cranial appendages that can be found in cervoids (with the exception of musk deer). In oxen and antelope, the size and shape of the horns varies greatly, but the basic structure is always a pair of simple bony protrusions without branches, often having a spiral, twisted, or fluted form, each covered in a permanent sheath of keratin. The unique horn structure is the only unambiguous morphological feature of bovids that distinguishes them from other pecorans. Male horn development has been linked to sexual selection, while the presence of horns in females is likely due to natural selection. The horns of females are usually smaller than those of males and are sometimes of a different shape. The horns of female bovids are thought to have evolved for defense against predators or to express territoriality, as non-territorial females, which are able to use crypsis for predator defense, often lack horns.
Rhinoceros horns, unlike those of other horned mammals, consist only of keratin. These horns rest on the nasal ridge of the animal's skull.
Antlers are unique to cervids and found mostly on males: the only cervid females with antlers are caribou and reindeer, whose antlers are normally smaller than males'. Nevertheless, fertile does of other species of deer have the capacity to produce antlers on occasion, usually due to increased testosterone levels. Each antler grows from an attachment point on the skull called a pedicle. While an antler is growing it is covered with highly vascular skin called velvet, which supplies oxygen and nutrients to the growing bone. Antlers are considered one of the most exaggerated cases of male secondary sexual traits in the animal kingdom, and grow faster than any other mammal bone. Growth occurs at the tip, initially as cartilage that is then mineralized to become bone. Once the antler has achieved its full size, the velvet is lost and the antler's bone dies. This dead bone structure is the mature antler. In most cases, the bone at the base is destroyed by osteoclasts and the antlers eventually fall off. As a result of their fast growth rate, antlers place a substantial nutritional demand on deer, and they can thus constitute an honest signal of metabolic efficiency and food gathering capability.
Ossicones are horn-like (or antler-like) protuberances found on the heads of giraffes and male okapis. They are similar to the horns of antelopes and cattle, save that they are derived from ossified cartilage, and that the ossicones remain covered in skin and fur rather than horn.
Pronghorn cranial appendages are unique. Each "horn" of the pronghorn is composed of a slender, laterally flattened blade of bone that grows from the frontal bones of the skull, forming a permanent core. As in the Giraffidae, skin covers the bony cores, but in the pronghorn it develops into a keratinous sheath that is shed and regrown on an annual basis. Unlike the horns of the family Bovidae, the horn sheaths of the pronghorn are branched, each sheath possessing a forward-pointing tine (hence the name pronghorn). The horns of males are well developed.


A marine mammal park (also known as marine animal park and sometimes oceanarium) is a commercial theme park or aquarium where marine mammals such as dolphins, beluga whales and sea lions are kept within water tanks and displayed to the public in special shows. A marine mammal park is more elaborate than a dolphinarium, because it also features other marine mammals and offers additional entertainment attractions. It is thus seen as a combination of a public aquarium and an amusement park. Marine mammal parks are different from marine parks, which include natural reserves and marine wildlife sanctuaries such as coral reefs, particularly in Australia.
History
Sea Lion Park opened in 1895 at Coney Island in Brooklyn, New York with an aquatic show featuring 40 sea lions. It closed in 1903.
The second marine mammal park, then called an oceanarium, was established in St. Augustine, Florida in 1938. It was initially a large water tank used to exhibit marine mammals for filming underwater movies, and only later became a public attraction. Today Marineland of Florida claims to be "the world's first oceanarium."
In November 1961, Marineland of the Pacific on the Palos Verdes Peninsula near Los Angeles became the first park to display an orca in captivity, although the orca named Wanda died after two days. The Vancouver Aquarium had the second orca held alive in captivity, Moby Doll, for three months in 1964.
Between the 1970s and the 1990s, technical advances and the public's increasing interest in aquatic environments prompted a shift to large marine mammal parks with cetaceans (mostly orcas and other species of dolphin) as attractions. Within this time, SeaWorld USA emerged, with operations in Orlando, Florida, San Diego, California, San Antonio, Texas and Aurora, Ohio (the Ohio location has since ceased operations).
On July 13, 1865, P. T. Barnum's museum in New York City caught fire and killed two captive beluga whales, which were boiled alive in their tank.
List of parksAsiaAustraliaEuropeNorth AmericaSouth AmericaCriticism and animal welfare
Many animal welfare groups, such as the WSPA, consider keeping whales and dolphins in captivity a form of abuse. The main argument is that whales and dolphins do not have enough freedom of movement within their artificial environments. The existence of marine mammal parks is thus very controversial.
Although sizable pools for whales and dolphins require an extraordinarily technical and financial expenditure and are thus very difficult to maintain, many marine mammal parks endeavour to improve the conditions of captivity and attempt to engage in public education as well as scientific studies. For that purpose, many marine mammal parks joined the Alliance of Marine Mammal Parks and Aquariums, an international association dedicated to a high standard of care of marine mammals. It was founded in 1987 and established offices near Washington, D.C. in 1992. One report found that there is little objective evidence to indicate that marine mammal parks further public knowledge.
In 2010, the practice of keeping animals in captivity as trained show performers was heavily criticized when a trainer was killed by an orca whale at SeaWorld Orlando in Florida. Orca attacks were documented in the 2013 film Blackfish. In 2015, the California Coastal Commission banned the breeding of captive killer whales.
Captivity of marine mammals
Animal captivity is the capturing and holding of an animal. Animals have been held captive for entertainment purposes and domestication. As of 2016, 63 whales and dolphins who are held captive have significantly less space than they would have in the wild. Marine mammals in captivity have demonstrated behavioral changes in response to the death or separation of a pod mate or family member.
Dolphins
Captive dolphins are six times more likely to die than those in the wild because of the stress and poor treatment that they endure, living on average 40 years less in captivity than they would in the wild. The stress of captivity prevents dolphin reproduction, with rare exceptions. Dolphins in their natural habitat spend approximately 80% of their time deep underwater and swim about 40 miles per day. Dolphins in captivity spend about 80% of their time above water and swim just a few miles per day.
Orcas
In the wild, orcas swim about 100 miles per day and only spend approximately 10% of their lives at the surface of the ocean. In captivity, orcas cannot swim to their necessary depth, causing sunburn and blisters. The extended exposure to open air can cause the dorsal fin to collapse. As of 2016, 63 orcas are in captivity in the U.S. Studies show that nearly all captive orcas die for reasons other than old age. Twelve orcas have died at Sea World since 1970. SeaWorld San Diego has recorded 17 orca deaths since 1971. The orcas often die from pregnancy, disease and stress.[1]
The orca brain is among the largest and most complex of all marine mammals. Orcas appear to understand that they are in captivity under human care, and they depend on their pod mates and family for survival; it is rare for them to survive on their own. An orca named Loita at the Miami Seaquarium, captured at four years old and in captivity for almost 50 years, was set to be released but died in the summer of 2023 before she could be freed.
Prevention of captivity
The U.S. Congress passed the Animal Welfare Act of 1966 to protect animals who are under human care. The Marine Mammal Protection Act, signed into law in 1972 by President Richard Nixon, prohibits the capture of marine mammals.


The Marine Mammal Laboratory, formerly the National Marine Mammal Laboratory (NMML), is a United States research facility that conducts research on marine mammals under the direction of the National Marine Fisheries Service and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
The laboratory is based in Seattle, Washington, with research focused on the coastal waters of Alaska, Washington, Oregon, and California. It is organized into programs targeting Alaska ecosystems, polar ecosystems, cetacean assessment and ecology, and the California Current ecosystem. Research tasks include assessing stock quality and quantity, particularly trends in stock sizes. Research methods include satellite telemetry analysis and fieldwork from aircraft and ships.


Bulungu is an extinct genus of bandicoot-like mammal from Oligo-Miocene deposits of Riversleigh, northwestern Queensland, and the Etadunna Formation, Australia. It was first named by Gurovich et al. (2013) and the type species is Bulungu palara.
Two additional species, Bulungu campbelli and Bulungu minkinaensis, were also described in 2013. Bulungu muirheadae is the oldest fossil bandicoot recovered to date.  An additional three species Bulungu minkinaensis, Bulungu pinpaensis, and Bulungu westermani were named by Travouillon, Beck & Case (2021) allowing for placement of the genus in the superfamily Yaraloidea.


Ursus is a genus in the family Ursidae (bears) that includes the widely distributed brown bear, the polar bear, the American black bear, and the
Asian black bear. The name is derived from the Latin ursus, meaning bear.
Taxonomy and systematicsExtant species
A hybrid between grizzly bears and polar bears has also been recorded. Known commonly as a pizzly, prizzly, or grolar bear, the official name is simply "grizzly–polar bear hybrid".
Fossil species
†Ursus dolinensis (Garcia & Arsuaga, 2001)
†Ursus etruscus Cuvier, 1823
†Ursus minimus (Devèze & Bouillet, 1827)
Cave bear complex:
†Ursus deningeri Richenau, 1904
†Ursus ingressus Rabeder, Hofreiter, Nagel & Withalm 2004
†Ursus kudarensis Baryshnikov, 1985
†Ursus spelaeus Rosenmüller, 1794
†Ursus rossicus Borissiak, 1930
Mating system ecology
The mating systems within the genus Ursus are primarily classified as polygynous, polyandrous and promiscuous. Both males and females mate with more than one partner and use various strategies to increase their reproductive success. Since bears are sexually dimorphic, sexual conflict is a primary driving force behind sexual selection influencing intra-sexual and inter-sexual competition. Unlike more social species, bears, being solitary mammals, have wide-ranging habitats to locate potential mates.  Due to the asynchrony of oestrous phases and lengthy parental care by females, bear populations are usually male-biased, meaning that females are more choosy and males are more competitive. Intra-sexual selection is then characterized by male-male competitions influenced by female mate choice.
Mating seasons fluctuate based on species dependent on geographical location. American black bears (Ursus amercanus), brown bears (Ursus arctos) and polar bears (Ursus maritimus) all have mating seasons occurring within a three-month duration during the spring and summer months (approximately May – July), with delayed implantation occurring in late fall (November), and cubs born within the den during early winter (January). Females, on average, mate with three to four males during a mating season and mating males have more variation, mating with one to eight females during a mating season. Since reproductive success is positively correlated with age and size in bear populations, there are also males that do not mate at all until they are able to compete with larger males. There is a very loose dominance hierarchy within bear mating systems due to their solitary nature. Majority of dominance hierarchies are found at food congregations in which population density is high and individuals are ranked based on size, mass, aggressiveness and willingness to fight. Overall, dominance hierarchies have lower adaptive strategies in solitary species and dominance is established based on encounters during the breeding season.
The mating system is generally characterised by two main components, the search phase and the encounter phase. During the breeding season, both males and females expand their home ranges to help increase the likelihood of finding potential mates. Males, especially, adopt a roaming strategy, covering a large geographic range to find receptive females and tracking them via chemoreceptors. Male bears are not considered to be territorial, but they do have large home ranges that may overlap with female home ranges, giving them access to a range of 3–15 females.
Male-male competition
Males compete for females using contest competition, scramble competition and sperm competition as mechanisms for sexual selection. The pre-copulatory mechanisms, including contest and scramble competition, are conditional mating tactics that are used based on an individual's phenotype. Males that are larger in size compete more in physical contests to access potential mates, while males that are smaller or medium-sized use scramble competition as a strategy by increasing their ranges to encounter potential mates. Age and size are positively correlated and as males mature, they grow in size and experience, monopolizing receptive females. Observations of broken canines, cuts, wounds and scars demonstrate the costs associated with contests and the importance of physical intra-sexual conflict within polygamous mating systems.
There is also post-copulatory male-male competition that has been documented in species within the genus Ursus. The presence of dual paternity within a litter implies that sperm competition may take place after copulation.
Another male strategy observed by male bears is sexually selected infanticide. This results in males killing the offspring of other males to directly and indirectly improve their own reproductive success. This can directly influence their success by mating with the female when she re-enters oestrus or indirectly by lowering intra-sexual competition with other males and resources.
Female mate choice
Female choice is based on the cost of searching for a mate and the quality of a mate. Since females are induced ovulators, studies suggest that they may have control over the paternity of their offspring. This may be done through pre- and post-copulatory counter-strategies that involve cryptic female choice and sexually selected infanticide. The hypothesis of sexually selected infanticide is a female counterstrategy that can directly and indirectly improve their fitness. This is done by selecting for infanticidal males to enforce mate and offspring recognition and indirectly by mating with multiple males in order to have multiple paternity.
Within Ursus, there may be a high variation within the mating strategies observed by both females and males, demonstrating overall plasticity depending on external factors. This demonstrates the conditional mating tactics that male bears may consider based on their age and size, as well as the counter-strategies of females, including sexually selected infanticide and cryptic female choice.


An organism's sex is female (symbol: ♀) if it produces the ovum (egg cell), the type of gamete (sex cell) that fuses with the male gamete (sperm cell) during sexual reproduction.
A female has larger gametes than a male. Females and males are results of the anisogamous reproduction system, wherein gametes are of different sizes (unlike isogamy where they are the same size).
In species that have males and females, sex-determination may be based on either sex chromosomes, or environmental conditions. Most female mammals, including female humans, have two X chromosomes. Characteristics of organisms with a female sex vary between different species, having different female reproductive systems, with some species showing characteristics secondary to the reproductive system, as with mammary glands in mammals.
In humans, the word female can also be used to refer to gender in the social sense of gender role or gender identity.
Etymology and usage
The word female comes from the Latin femella, the diminutive form of femina, meaning "woman", by way of the Old French femelle. It is not etymologically related to the word male, but in the late 14th century the English spelling was altered to parallel that of male.  It has been used as both noun and adjective since the 14th century.  Originally, from its first appearance in the 1300s, female exclusively referred to humans and always indicated that the speaker spoke of a woman or a girl.  A century later, the meaning was expanded to include non-human female organisms.
For several centuries, using the word female as a noun was considered more respectful than calling her a woman or a lady and was preferred for that reason; however, by 1895, the linguistic fashion had changed, and female was often considered disparaging, usually on the grounds that it grouped humans with other animals.  In the 21st century, the noun female is primarily used to describe non-human animals, to refer to biologically female humans in an impersonal technical context (e.g., "Females were more likely than males to develop an autoimmune disease"), or to impartially include a range of people without reference to age (e.g., girls) or social status (e.g., lady).  As an adjective, female is still used in some contexts, particularly when the sex of the person is relevant, such as female athletes or to distinguish a male nurse from a female one.
Biological sex is conceptually distinct from gender, although they are often used interchangeably. The adjective female can describe a person's sex or gender identity.
The word can also refer to the shape of connectors and fasteners, such as screws, electrical pins, and technical equipment. Under this convention, sockets and receptacles are called female, and the corresponding plugs male.
Defining characteristics
Females produce ova, the usually larger gametes in a heterogamous reproduction system, while the smaller and usually motile gametes, the spermatozoa, are produced by males. Generally, a female cannot reproduce sexually without access to the gametes of a male, and vice versa, but in some species females can reproduce by themselves asexually, for example via parthenogenesis.
Patterns of sexual reproduction include:

Isogamous species with two or more mating types with gametes of identical form and behavior (but different at the molecular level),
Anisogamous species with gametes of male and female types,
Oogamous species, which include humans, in which the female gamete is much larger than the male and has no ability to move. Oogamy is a form of anisogamy. There is an argument that this pattern was driven by the physical constraints on the mechanisms by which two gametes get together as required for sexual reproduction.
Other than the defining difference in the type of gamete produced, differences between males and females in one lineage cannot always be predicted by differences in another. The concept is not limited to animals; egg cells are produced by chytrids, diatoms, water moulds and land plants, among others. In land plants, female and male designate not only the egg- and sperm-producing organisms and structures, but also the structures of the sporophytes that give rise to male and female plants.
Females across species
Species that are divided into females and males are classified as gonochoric in animals, as dioecious in seed plants and as dioicous in cryptogams.
In some species, female and hermaphrodite individuals may coexist, a sexual system termed gynodioecy. In a few species, female individuals coexist with males and hermaphrodites; this sexual system is called trioecy. In Thor manningi (a species of shrimp), females coexist with males and protandrous hermaphrodites.
Mammalian female
A distinguishing characteristic of the class Mammalia is the presence of mammary glands. Mammary glands are modified sweat glands that produce milk, which is used to feed the young for some time after birth. Only mammals produce milk. Mammary glands are obvious in humans, because the female human body stores large amounts of fatty tissue near the nipples, resulting in prominent breasts. Mammary glands are present in all mammals, although they are normally redundant in males of the species.
Most mammalian females have two copies of the X chromosome, while males have only one X and one smaller Y chromosome; some mammals, such as the platypus, have different combinations. One of the female's X chromosomes is randomly inactivated in each cell of placental mammals while the paternally derived X is inactivated in marsupials. In birds and some reptiles, by contrast, it is the female which is heterozygous and carries a Z and a W chromosome while the male carries two Z chromosomes. In mammals, females can have XXX or X.
Mammalian females bear live young, with the exception of monotreme females, which lay eggs. Some non-mammalian species, such as guppies, have analogous reproductive structures; and some other non-mammals, such as some sharks, also bear live young.
Following experiments by French endocrinologist Alfred Jost in the 1940s, it is widely believed that the female is the default sex in mammalian sexual determination. However, this idea was called into question by a 2017 study.
Sex determination
The sex of a particular organism may be determined by genetic or environmental factors, or may naturally change during the course of an organism's life.
Genetic determination
The sex of most mammals, including humans, is genetically determined by the XY sex-determination system where females have XX (as opposed to XY in males) sex chromosomes. It is also possible in a variety of species, including humans, to have other karyotypes. During reproduction, the male contributes either an X sperm or a Y sperm, while the female always contributes an X egg. A Y sperm and an X egg produce a male, while an X sperm and an X egg produce a female. The ZW sex-determination system, where females have ZW (as opposed to ZZ in males) sex chromosomes, is found in birds, reptiles and some insects and other organisms.
Environmental determination
The young of some species develop into one sex or the other depending on local environmental conditions, e.g. the sex of crocodilians is influenced by the temperature of their eggs. Other species (such as the goby) can transform, as adults, from one sex to the other in response to local reproductive conditions (such as a brief shortage of males).
In many arthropods, sex is determined by infection with parasitic, endosymbiotic bacteria of the genus Wolbachia. The bacterium can only be transmitted via infected ova, and the presence of the obligate endoparasite may be required for female sexual viability.
Evolution
The question of how females evolved is mainly a question of why males evolved. The first organisms reproduced asexually, usually via binary fission, wherein a cell splits itself in half. From a strict numbers perspective, a species that is half males/half females can produce half the offspring an asexual population can, because only the females are having offspring. Being male can also carry significant costs, such as in flashy sexual displays in animals (such as big antlers or colorful feathers), or needing to produce an outsized amount of pollen as a plant in order to get a chance to fertilize a female. Yet despite the costs of being male, there must be some advantage to the process.
The advantages are explained by the evolution of anisogamy, which led to the evolution of male and female function. Before the evolution of anisogamy, mating types in a species were isogamous: the same size and both could move, catalogued only as "+" or "-" types. In anisogamy, the mating cells are called gametes. The female gamete is larger than the male gamete, and usually immotile. Anisogamy remains poorly understood, as there is no fossil record of its emergence. Numerous theories exist as to why anisogamy emerged. Many share a common thread, in that larger female gametes are more likely to survive, and that smaller male gametes are more likely to find other gametes because they can travel faster. Current models often fail to account for why isogamy remains in a few species. Anisogamy appears to have evolved multiple times from isogamy; for example female Volvocales (a type of green algae) evolved from the plus mating type. Although sexual evolution emerged at least 1.2 billion years ago, the lack of anisogamous fossil records make it hard to pinpoint when females evolved.
Female sex organs (genitalia, in animals) have an extreme range of variation among species and even within species. The evolution of female genitalia remains poorly understood compared to male genitalia, reflecting a now-outdated belief that female genitalia are less varied than male genitalia, and thus less useful to study. The difficulty of reaching female genitalia has also complicated their study. New 3D technology has made female genital study simpler. Genitalia evolve very quickly. There are three main hypotheses as to what impacts female genital evolution: lock-and-key (genitals must fit together), cryptic female choice (females affect whether males can fertilize them), and sexual conflict (a sort of sexual arms race). There is also a hypothesis that female genital evolution is the result of pleiotropy, i.e. unrelated genes that are affected by environmental conditions like low food also affect genitals. That hypothesis is unlikely to apply to a significant number of species, but natural selection in general has some role in female genital evolution.
Symbol
The symbol ♀ (Unicode: U+2640 Alt codes: Alt+12), a circle with a small cross underneath, is commonly used to represent females. Joseph Justus Scaliger once speculated that the symbol was associated with Venus, goddess of beauty, because it resembles a bronze mirror with a handle, but modern scholars consider that fanciful, and the most established view is that the female and male symbols derive from contractions in Greek script of the Greek names of the planets Thouros (Mars) and Phosphoros (Venus).


Marsupials are a diverse group of mammals belonging to the infraclass Marsupialia. They are natively found in Australasia, Wallacea, and the Americas. One of marsupials' unique features is their reproductive strategy: the young are born in a relatively undeveloped state and then nurtured within a pouch on their mother's abdomen. Extant marsupials encompass many species, including kangaroos, koalas, opossums, possums, Tasmanian devils, wombats, wallabies, and bandicoots.
Marsupials constitute a clade stemming from the last common ancestor of extant Metatheria, which encompasses all mammals more closely related to marsupials than to placentals. The evolutionary split between placentals and marsupials occurred 125–160 million years ago in the Middle Jurassic–Early Cretaceous period.
Presently, close to 70% of the 334 extant marsupial species  are concentrated on the Australian continent, including mainland Australia, Tasmania, New Guinea, and nearby islands. The remaining 30% are distributed across the Americas, primarily in South America, with thirteen species in Central America and a single species, the Virginia opossum, inhabiting North America north of Mexico. Marsupial sizes range from a few grams in the long-tailed planigale, to several tons in the extinct Diprotodon.
The word marsupial comes from marsupium, the technical term for the abdominal pouch. It, in turn, is borrowed from the Latin marsupium and ultimately from the ancient Greek μάρσιππος (mársippos), meaning 'pouch'.
Anatomy
Marsupials have typical mammalian characteristics, e.g., mammary glands, three middle ear bones (and ears that usually have tragi, varying in hearing thresholds), true hair and bone structure. However, striking differences, including anatomical features, separate them from eutherians.
Most female marsupials have a front pouch, which contains multiple nursing teats. Marsupials have other common structural features. Ossified patellae are absent in most modern marsupials (with exceptions) and epipubic bones are present. Marsupials (and monotremes) also lack a gross communication (corpus callosum) between the right and left brain hemispheres.
Skull and teeth
Marsupials exhibit distinct cranial features compared to placentals. Generally, their skulls are relatively small and compact. Notably, they possess frontal holes known as foramen lacrimale situated at the front of the orbit. Marsupials have enlarged cheekbones that extend further to the rear, and their lower jaw's angular extension (processus angularis) is bent toward the center. The hard palate of marsupials contains more openings than that of placentals.
Teeth differ significantly. Most Australian marsupials outside the order Diprotodontia have a varying number of incisors between their upper and lower jaws. Early marsupials had a dental formula of 5.1.3.44.1.3.4 per quadrant, consisting of five (maxillary) or four (mandibular) incisors, one canine, three premolars, and four molars, totaling 50 teeth. While some taxa, like the opossum, retain this original tooth count, others have reduced numbers.
For instance, members of the Macropodidae family, including kangaroos and wallabies, have a dental formula of 3.0–1.2.41.000.2.4. Many marsupials typically have between 40 and 50 teeth, more than most placentals. In marsupials, the second set of teeth only grows in at the site of the third premolar and posteriorly; all teeth anterior to this erupt initially as permanent teeth.
Torso
Few general characteristics describe their skeleton. In addition to unique details in the construction of the ankle, epipubic bones (ossa epubica) are observed projecting forward from the pubic bone of the pelvis. Since these are present in males and pouchless species, it is believed that they originally had no function in reproduction, but served in the muscular approach to the movement of the hind limbs. This could be explained by an original feature of mammals, as these epipubic bones are also found in monotremes. Marsupial reproductive organs differ from placentals. For them, the reproductive tract is doubled. Females have two uteri and two vaginas, and before birth, a birth canal forms between them, the median vagina. In most species, males have a split or double penis lying in front of the scrotum, which is not homologous to the placental scrota.
A pouch is present in most species. Many marsupials have a permanent bag, while in others such as the shrew opossum the pouch develops during gestation, where the young are hidden only by skin folds or in the maternal fur. The arrangement of the pouch is variable to allow the offspring to receive maximum protection. Locomotive kangaroos have a pouch opening at the front, while many others that walk or climb on all fours open in the back. Usually, only females have a pouch, but the male water opossum has a pouch that protects his genitalia while swimming or running.
General and convergences
Marsupials have adapted to many habitats, reflected in the wide variety in their build. The largest living marsupial, the red kangaroo, grows up to 1.8 metres (5 ft 11 in) in height and 90 kilograms (200 lb) in weight. Extinct genera, such as Diprotodon, were significantly larger and heavier. The smallest marsupials are the marsupial mice, which reach only 5 centimetres (2.0 in) in body length.
Some species resemble placentals and are examples of convergent evolution. This convergence is evident in both brain evolution and behaviour. The extinct thylacine strongly resembled the placental wolf, hence one of its nicknames "Tasmanian wolf". The ability to glide evolved in both marsupials (as with sugar gliders) and some placentals (as with flying squirrels), which developed independently. Other groups such as the kangaroo, however, do not have clear placental counterparts, though they share similarities in lifestyle and ecological niches with ruminants.
Body temperature
Marsupials, along with monotremes (platypuses and echidnas), typically have lower body temperatures than similarly sized placentals (eutherians), with the averages being 35 °C (95 °F) for marsupials and 37 °C (99 °F) for placentals. Some species bask to conserve energy.
Reproductive system
Marsupial reproductive systems differ markedly from those of placentals. During embryonic development, a choriovitelline placenta forms in all marsupials. In bandicoots, an additional chorioallantoic placenta forms, although it lacks the chorionic villi found in eutherian placentas.
Both sexes possess a cloaca, although modified by connecting to a urogenital sac and having a separate anal region in most species. The bladder of marsupials functions as a site to concentrate urine and empties into the common urogenital sinus in both females and males.
Males
Most male marsupials, except for macropods and marsupial moles, have a bifurcated penis, separated into two columns, so that the penis has two ends corresponding to the females' two vaginas. The penis is used only during copulation, and is separate from the urinary tract. It curves forward when erect, and when not erect, it is retracted into the body in an S-shaped curve. Neither marsupials nor monotremes possess a baculum. The shape of the glans penis varies among marsupial species.
The shape of the urethral grooves of the males' genitalia is used to distinguish between opossum species Monodelphis brevicaudata, M. domestica, and M. americana. The grooves form two channels that form the ventral and dorsal folds of the erectile tissue. Several species of dasyurid marsupials can also be distinguished by their penis morphology. Marsupials' only accessory sex glands are the prostate and bulbourethral glands. Male marsupials have one to three pairs of bulbourethral glands. Ampullae of vas deferens, seminal vesicles or coagulating glands are not present. The prostate is proportionally larger in marsupials than in placentals. During the breeding season, the male tammar wallaby's prostate and bulbourethral gland enlarge. However, the weight of the testes does not vary seasonally.
Females
Female marsupials have two lateral vaginas, which lead to separate uteri, both accessed through the same orifice. A third canal, the median vagina, is used for birth. This canal can be transitory or permanent. Some marsupial species store sperm in the oviduct after mating.
Marsupials give birth very early in gestation; after birth, newborns crawl up their mothers' bodies and attach themselves to a teat, which is located on the underside of the mother, either inside a pouch called the marsupium, or externally. Mothers often lick their fur to leave a trail of scent for the newborn to follow to increase their chances of reaching the marsupium. There they remain for several weeks. Offspring eventually leave the marsupium for short periods, returning to it for warmth, protection, and nourishment.
Early development
Gestation differs between marsupials and placentals. Key aspects of the first stages of placental embryo development, such as the inner cell mass and the process of compaction, are not found in marsupials. The cleavage stages of marsupial development vary among groups and aspects of marsupial early development are not yet fully understood.
Marsupials have a short gestation period – typically between 12 and 33 days, but as low as 10 days in the case of the stripe-faced dunnart and as long as 38 days for the long-nosed potoroo. The baby (joey) is born in a fetal state, equivalent to an 8–12 week human fetus, blind, furless, and small in comparison to placental newborns: sizes range from 4–800g+. A newborn can be categorized in one of three grades of development. The least developed are found in dasyurids, intermediates are found in didelphids and peramelids, and the most developed are macropods. The newborn crawls across its mother's fur to reach the pouch, where it latches onto a teat. It does not emerge for several months, during which time it relies on its mother's milk for essential nutrients, growth factors and immunological defence. Genes expressed in the eutherian placenta needed for the later stages of fetal development are expressed in females in their mammary glands during lactation. After this period, the joey spends increasing periods out of the pouch, feeding and learning survival skills. However, it returns to the pouch to sleep, and if danger threatens, it seeks refuge in its mother's pouch.
An early birth removes a developing marsupial from its mother's body much sooner than in placentals; thus marsupials lack a complex placenta to protect the embryo from its mother's immune system. Though early birth puts the newborn at greater environmental risk, it significantly reduces the dangers associated with long pregnancies, as the fetus cannot compromise the mother in bad seasons. Marsupials are altricial animals, needing intensive care following birth (cf. precocial). Newborns lack histologically mature immune tissues and are highly reliant on their mother's immune system for immunological protection.
Newborns front limbs and facial structures are much more developed than the rest of their bodies at birth. This requirement has been argued to have limited the range of locomotor adaptations in marsupials compared to placentals. Marsupials must develop grasping forepaws early, complicating the evolutive transition from these limbs into hooves, wings, or flippers. However, several marsupials do possess atypical forelimb morphologies, such as the hooved forelimbs of the pig-footed bandicoot, suggesting that the range of forelimb specialization is not as limited as assumed.
Joeys stay in the pouch for up to a year or until the next joey arrives. Joeys are unable to regulate their body temperature and rely upon an external heat source. Until the joey is well-furred and old enough to leave the pouch, a pouch temperature of 30–32 °C (86–90 °F) must be constantly maintained.
Joeys are born with "oral shields", soft tissue that reduces the mouth opening to a round hole just large enough to accept the teat. Once inside the mouth, a bulbous swelling on the end of the teat attaches it to the offspring till it has grown large enough to let go. In species without pouches or with rudimentary pouches these are more developed than in forms with well-developed pouches, implying an increased role in ensuring that the young remain attached to the teat.
Range
In Australasia, marsupials are found in Australia, Tasmania and New Guinea; throughout the Maluku Islands, Timor and Sulawesi to the west of New Guinea, and in the Bismarck Archipelago (including the Admiralty Islands) and Solomon Islands to the east of New Guinea.
In the Americas, marsupials are found throughout South America, excluding the central/southern Andes and parts of Patagonia; and through Central America and south-central Mexico, with a single species (the Virginia opossum Didelphis virginiana) widespread in the eastern United States and along the Pacific coast.
Interaction with Europeans
Europeans' first encounter with a marsupial was the common opossum. Vicente Yáñez Pinzón, commander of the Niña on Christopher Columbus's first voyage in the late fifteenth century, collected a female opossum with young in her pouch off the South American coast. He presented them to the Spanish monarchs, though by then the young were lost and the female had died. The animal was noted for its strange pouch or "second belly".
The Portuguese first described Australasian marsupials: António Galvão, a Portuguese administrator in Ternate (1536–1540), wrote a detailed account of the northern common cuscus (Phalanger orientalis):

Some animals resemble ferrets, only a little bigger. They are called Kusus. They have a long tail with which they hang from the trees in which they live continuously, winding it once or twice around a branch. On their belly they have  a pocket like an intermediate balcony; as soon as they give birth to a young one, they grow it inside there at a teat until it does not need nursing anymore. As soon as she has borne and nourished it, the mother becomes pregnant again.
In the 17th century, more accounts of marsupials emerged. A 1606 record of an animal killed on the southern coast of New Guinea described it as "in the shape of a dog, smaller than a greyhound", with a snakelike "bare scaly tail" and hanging testicles. The meat tasted like venison, and the stomach contained ginger leaves. This description appears to closely resemble the dusky pademelon (Thylogale brunii), the earliest European record of a member of the Macropodidae.
Taxonomy
Marsupials are taxonomically identified as members of mammalian infraclass Marsupialia, first described as a family under the order Pollicata by German zoologist Johann Karl Wilhelm Illiger in his 1811 work Prodromus Systematis Mammalium et Avium. However, James Rennie, author of The Natural History of Monkeys, Opossums and Lemurs (1838), pointed out that the placement of five different groups of mammals – monkeys, lemurs, tarsiers, aye-ayes and marsupials (with the exception of kangaroos, which were placed under the order Salientia) – under a single order (Pollicata) did not appear to have a strong justification. In 1816, French zoologist George Cuvier classified all marsupials under Marsupialia. In 1997, researcher J. A. W. Kirsch and others accorded infraclass rank to Marsupialia.
Classification
With seven living orders in total, Marsupialia is further divided as follows:† – Extinct

Superorder Ameridelphia (American marsupials)
Order Didelphimorphia (93 species) – see list of didelphimorphs
Family Didelphidae: opossums
Order Paucituberculata (seven species)
Family Caenolestidae: shrew opossums
Superorder Australidelphia (Australian marsupials)
Order Microbiotheria (one extant species)
Family Microbiotheriidae: monitos del monte
Order †Yalkaparidontia (incertae sedis)
Grandorder Agreodontia
Order Dasyuromorphia (73 species) – see list of dasyuromorphs
Family †Thylacinidae: thylacine
Family Dasyuridae: antechinuses, quolls, dunnarts, Tasmanian devil, and relatives
Family Myrmecobiidae: numbat
Order Notoryctemorphia (two species)
Family Notoryctidae: marsupial moles
Order Peramelemorphia (27 species)
Family Thylacomyidae: bilbies
Family †Chaeropodidae: pig-footed bandicoots
Family Peramelidae: bandicoots and allies
Order Diprotodontia (136 species) – see list of diprotodonts
Suborder Vombatiformes
Family Vombatidae: wombats
Family Phascolarctidae: koalas
Family † Diprotodontidae
Family † Palorchestidae: marsupial tapirs
Family † Thylacoleonidae: marsupial lions
Suborder Phalangeriformes – see list of phalangeriformes
Family Acrobatidae: feathertail glider and feather-tailed possum
Family Burramyidae: pygmy possums
Family †Ektopodontidae: sprite possums
Family Petauridae: striped possum, Leadbeater's possum, yellow-bellied glider, sugar glider, mahogany glider, squirrel glider
Family Phalangeridae: brushtail possums and cuscuses
Family Pseudocheiridae: ringtailed possums and relatives
Family Tarsipedidae: honey possum
Suborder Macropodiformes – see list of macropodiformes
Family Macropodidae: kangaroos, wallabies, and relatives
Family Potoroidae: potoroos, rat kangaroos, bettongs
Family Hypsiprymnodontidae: musky rat-kangaroo
Family † Balbaridae: basal quadrupedal kangaroos
Evolutionary history
Comprising over 300 extant species, several attempts have been made to accurately interpret the phylogenetic relationships among the different marsupial orders. Studies differ on whether Didelphimorphia or Paucituberculata is a sister group to all other marsupials. Though the order Microbiotheria (which has only one species, the monito del monte) is found in South America, morphological similarities suggest it is closely related to Australian marsupials. Molecular analyses in 2010 and 2011 identified Microbiotheria as a sister group to all Australian marsupials. However, the relations among the four Australidelphid orders are not as well understood.

DNA evidence supports a South American origin for marsupials, with Australian marsupials arising from a single Gondwanan migration of marsupials from South America, across the Antarctic land bridge, to Australia. There are many small arboreal species in each group. The term "opossum" is used to refer to American species (though "possum" is a common abbreviation), while similar Australian species are properly called "possums".
The relationships among the three extant divisions of mammals (monotremes, marsupials, and placentals) were long a matter of debate among taxonomists. Most morphological evidence comparing traits such as number and arrangement of teeth and structure of the reproductive and waste elimination systems as well as most genetic and molecular evidence favors a closer evolutionary relationship between the marsupials and placentals than either has with the monotremes.
The ancestors of marsupials, part of a larger group called metatherians, probably split from those of placentals (eutherians) during the mid-Jurassic period, though no fossil evidence of metatherians themselves are known from this time. From DNA and protein analyses, the time of divergence of the two lineages has been estimated to be around 100 to 120 mya. Fossil metatherians are distinguished from eutherians by the form of their teeth; metatherians possess four pairs of molar teeth in each jaw, whereas eutherian mammals (including true placentals) never have more than three pairs. Using this criterion, the earliest known metatherian was thought to be Sinodelphys szalayi, which lived in China around 125 mya. However, Sinodelphys was later reinterpreted as an early member of Eutheria. The unequivocal oldest known metatherians are now 110 million years old fossils from western North America. Metatherians were widespread in North America and Asia during the Late Cretaceous, but suffered a severe decline during the end-Cretaceous extinction event.
Cladogram from Wilson et al. (2016)

In 2022, a study provided strong evidence that the earliest known marsupial was Deltatheridium known from specimens from the Campanian age of the Late Cretaceous in Mongolia. This study placed both Deltatheridium and Pucadelphys as sister taxa to the modern large American opossums.
Marsupials spread to South America from North America during the Paleocene, possibly via the Aves Ridge. Northern Hemisphere metatherians, which were of low morphological and species diversity compared to contemporary placental mammals, eventually became extinct during the Miocene epoch.
In South America, the opossums evolved and developed a strong presence, and the Paleogene also saw the evolution of shrew opossums (Paucituberculata) alongside non-marsupial metatherian predators such as the borhyaenids and the saber-toothed Thylacosmilus. South American niches for mammalian carnivores were dominated by these marsupial and sparassodont metatherians, which seem to have competitively excluded South American placentals from evolving carnivory. While placental predators were absent, the metatherians did have to contend with avian (terror bird) and terrestrial crocodylomorph competition. Marsupials were excluded in turn from large herbivore niches in South America by the presence of native placental ungulates (now extinct) and xenarthrans (whose largest forms are also extinct). South America and Antarctica remained connected until 35 mya, as shown by the unique fossils found there. North and South America were disconnected until about three million years ago, when the Isthmus of Panama formed. This led to the Great American Interchange. Sparassodonts disappeared for unclear reasons – again, this has classically assumed as competition from carnivoran placentals, but the last sparassodonts co-existed with a few small carnivorans like procyonids and canines, and disappeared long before the arrival of macropredatory forms like felines, while didelphimorphs (opossums) invaded Central America, with the Virginia opossum reaching as far north as Canada.
Marsupials reached Australia via the Antarctic Land Bridge during the Early Eocene, around 50 mya, shortly after Australia had split off. This suggests a single dispersion event of just one species, most likely a relative to South America's monito del monte (a microbiothere, the only New World australidelphian). This progenitor may have rafted across the widening, but still narrow, gap between Australia and Antarctica. The journey must not have been easy; South American ungulate and xenarthran remains have been found in Antarctica, but these groups did not reach Australia.
In Australia, marsupials radiated into the wide variety seen today, including not only omnivorous and carnivorous forms such as were present in South America, but also into large herbivores. Modern marsupials appear to have reached the islands of New Guinea and Sulawesi relatively recently via Australia. A 2010 analysis of retroposon insertion sites in the nuclear DNA of a variety of marsupials has confirmed all living marsupials have South American ancestors. The branching sequence of marsupial orders indicated by the study puts Didelphimorphia in the most basal position, followed by Paucituberculata, then Microbiotheria, and ending with the radiation of Australian marsupials. This indicates that Australidelphia arose in South America, and reached Australia after Microbiotheria split off.
In Australia, terrestrial placentals disappeared early in the Cenozoic (their most recent known fossils being 55 million-year-old teeth resembling those of condylarths) for reasons that are not clear, allowing marsupials to dominate the Australian ecosystem. Extant native Australian terrestrial placentals (such as hopping mice) are relatively recent immigrants, arriving via island hopping from Southeast Asia.
Genetic analysis suggests a divergence date between the marsupials and the placentals at 160 million years ago. The ancestral number of chromosomes has been estimated to be 2n = 14.
A recent hypothesis suggests that South American microbiotheres resulted from a back-dispersal from eastern Gondwana. This interpretation is based on new cranial and post-cranial marsupial fossils of Djarthia murgonensis from the early Eocene Tingamarra Local Fauna in Australia that indicate this species is the most plesiomorphic ancestor, the oldest unequivocal australidelphian, and may be the ancestral morphotype of the Australian marsupial radiation.
In 2023, imaging of a partial skeleton found in Australia by paleontologists from Flinders University led to the identification of Ambulator keanei, the first long-distance walker in Australia.


Pacific Marine Mammal Center is a rescue, rehabilitation, and release facility for sick or at-risk wild mammals in Laguna Beach, California, United States. It was started by Jim Stauffer in 1971.
History
In 1971, Stauffer, a Laguna Beach lifeguard, was alerted to a Pacific harbor seal pup which appeared to be sick. He took the pup to an animal hospital, where it was found to be infested with lungworms. Stauffer nurtured the pup back to health and returned it to the ocean, and continued rescuing mammals in the Laguna Beach area with kiddie pools installed in his backyard. The California Department of Fish and Game later issued a permit allowing Stauffer to temporarily house seals and sea lions at his home, the first of its kind in the state. From that, Friends of the Sea Lion, later Pacific Marine Mammal Center, was established.
Friends of the Sea Lion created membership cards and sold T-shirts to raise money in its early years. Their first major donation came from a woman whose dog Stauffer rescued from a cliff at Three Arch Bay; the woman then donated $10,000 to Stauffer's organization. In 1976, after the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals vacated their Laguna Canyon barn location, city leaders offered the site to Pacific Marine Mammal Center. In 2023, the center began an expansion budgeted at $14 million ($14.8 million in 2025), during which, many of their animals were temporarily transferred to SeaWorld San Diego.
Stauffer died in 2021, after which, the center continued its operations. In 2025, a domoic acid bloom caused an increase in the number of mammal strandings the center responded to, from 150 to 200 per year to 337 in six months. In 2026, the center received media attention when it rescued a sick sea lion pup that had jumped onto a sailboat off the coast of San Clemente. The sea lion, later named "Chump", was discovered to have pneumonia and be suffering from malnutrition. The center received further attention later that week, when it responded to a dead 11-short-ton (10,000 kg) humpback whale that had washed up ashore in Newport Beach. The center led the effort to dispose of the body; however, the carcass was eventually pulled out to sea by the tide.


Huracan is an extinct genus of agriotheriin ailuropodine bear from the Late Miocene to Early Pleistocene. Fossils were found from North America and Eastern Asia. Unlike its modern relative the giant panda (Ailuropoda melanoleuca), which is a bamboo specialist, Huracan was a hypercarnivorous (or omnivorous) genus of bear that had adaptations for cursoriality.
History
Specimens of Huracan were originally classified as species of the related genus Agriotherium. Hunt (1998) had noted differences in the structure of the carnassials between Agriotherium schneideri and Old World species of said genus, but lots of similarities between A. schneideri and genus Indarctos. This was further supported in the 2019 publication of A. hendeyi which led the authors of the study to do a comprehensive analysis of agriotheriin specimens to assess their taxonomy. In 2025, a new species of Huracan was discovered in Russia, H. borissiaki.
Systematics
When Jiangzuo et al. (2023) computed the phylogenetic analysis, they found Indarctos to be paraphyletic to the clade containing the genera Huracan and Agriotherium.
SpeciesHuracan schneideri
The type species, H. schneideri was formally described by Sellards in 1916 from fossil material collected from the Upper Bony Valley, Hardee and Polk counties, Florida, a typical Latest Hemphillian. The main holotype was a mandible (USNM 8838) but additional material of this species has since been collected from this locality and other locations from the southern United States, and parts of Mexico. Differs from other species in the genus of shorter and smaller premolars and molars. A 2019 thesis estimated that this species weighed 510 kg (1,120 lb), however a 2024 study found this species to be significantly smaller weighing 378 kg (833 lb). Including supplementary materials
H. coffeyi
H. coffeyi was described by Dalquest, 1986 on a holotype (MWSU 12147) found from Coffee Ranch in Texas. The holotype specimen is a partial mandible preserving some molar teeth. All specimens of the species were originally classified as those of Agriotherium schneideri, though H. coffeyi differs from H. schneideri in having much larger and longer premolars and molars.
H. qiui
H. qiui is a new species described by Jiangzuo et al. (2023). The holotype (HMV 2005) is a nearly complete skull from the Wangjiashan fossil locality. This species differs from H. coffeyi and H. schneideri in not being as hypercarnivorous with more developed anterior premolars and the first and second molars longer. The skull is also much narrower in this species.
Other possible species
Two species of agriotheriin bears, A. roblesi and I. punjabensis might belong to Huracan as well based on overall similarities of their molars. In the case of I. punjabensis is sister to the Agriotherium–Huracan clade.
Description
The short rostrum, resulting in increased out-forces of the jaw-closing muscles (temporalis and masseter), may have been an adaptation for cracking bones with their broad carnassials. Such use of the P4 and m1 teeth is supported by the heavy wear on these teeth in old individuals of Huracan and Arctodus simus (another giant bear). The low relative grinding area of the molars also suggests a carnivorous diet, although the omni-herbivorous spectacled bear also shares this characteristic.
PaleobiologyDiet
Jiangzou et al. suggested that this genus had a greater adaptation for a carnivorous diet than Indarctos, with isotopic analysis from Yepómera (Chihuahua) suggesting a carnivorous diet based on C4 consuming ungulates. Despite this, isotope data from Optima (Oklahoma)  suggests that Huracan was possibly omnivorous much like modern bears.


Eutheria (from Ancient Greek εὐ- (eú-), meaning "true, well", and θηρίον (thēríon), meaning "beast", and thus, "true beasts"), also called Pan-Placentalia, is the clade consisting of placental mammals and all therian mammals that are more closely related to placentals than to marsupials. Placentalia is the only surviving taxon of eutherians, and Eutheria is often used as a synonym of Placentalia in zoological contexts.
Eutherians are distinguished from non-eutherians by various phenotypic traits of the feet, ankles, jaws and teeth. All living placental mammals lack epipubic bones, which are present in all other living mammals (marsupials and monotremes). This allows for expansion of the abdomen during pregnancy, though epipubic bones are present in a number of primitive eutherians. Eutheria was named in 1872 by Theodore Gill; in 1880, Thomas Henry Huxley defined it to encompass a more broadly defined group than Placentalia.
The earliest unambiguous eutherians are known from the Early Cretaceous Yixian Formation of China, dating around 120 million years ago. Two tribosphenic mammals, Durlstodon and Durlstotherium from the Berriasian age (~145–140 million years ago) of the Early Cretaceous in southern England have also been suggested to represent early eutherians. Another possible eutherian species Juramaia sinensis has been dated at 161 million years ago from the early Late Jurassic (Oxfordian) of China. However some authors have considered Juramaia as a stem therian instead, and some sources have doubted the dating of the specimen.
Characteristics
Distinguishing features are:

an enlarged malleolus ("little hammer") at the bottom of the tibia, the larger of the two shin bones
the joint between the first metatarsal bone and the entocuneiform bone (the innermost of the three cuneiform bones) in the foot is offset farther back than the joint between the second metatarsal and middle cuneiform bones—in metatherians these joints are level with each other
various features of jaws and teeth including: having three molars in the halves of each jaw, each upper canine having two roots, the paraconid on the last lower premolar is pronounced, the talonid region of the lower molars is narrower than the trigonid.
Taxonomy
Eutheria (i.e. Placentalia sensu lato, Pan-Placentalia):

incertae sedis:
?Family †Holoclemensiidae  (often considered a basal metatherian)
?Genus †Hyotheridium
?Genus †Endotherium
Genus †Durlstodon
Genus †Durlstotherium
Genus †Microtherulum
Genus †Sinodelphys
Genus †Cokotherium
Genus †Ambolestes
Genus †Montanalestes
Genus †Indoclemensia
?Family †Horolodectidae (might belong somewhere within Placentalia sensu stricto)
?Genus †Juramaia
Genus †Eomaia
Genus †Acristatherium
Clade †Tamirtheria ? (monophyly disputed)
Genus †Prokennalestes
?Genus †Hovurlestes
Genus †Murtoilestes
Genus †Bobolestes (inclusive of the former genus Otlestes)
Family †Adapisoriculidae (inclusive of the genus †Sahnitherium)
Genus †Paranyctoides
Family †Zhelestidae (inclusive of the genus Eozhelestes)
Family †Cimolestidae (inclusive of the genera †Maelestes and †Batodon)
Order †Asioryctitheria
Family †Zalambdalestidae
Order †Leptictida
?Order †Taeniodonta
?Family †Didymoconidae
?Genus †Purgatorius
?Genus †Protungulatum
?Genus †Oxyprimus
Infraclass Placentalia sensu stricto
Notes:

Some older systems contained an order called Cimolesta (sensu lato), which contains the above taxa Cimolestidae, Taeniodonta and Didymoconidae, but also (some or all of) the taxa †Ptolemaiidae, †Palaeoryctidae, †Wyolestidae, †Pantolesta, †Tillodontia, †Apatotheria, †Pantodonta, Pholidota and †Palaeanodonta. Those additional taxa (which are usually considered members of Placentalia sensu stricto) were thus also placed next to Cimolestidae, now classified as basal Eutheria. Creodonta and Dinocerata have also been suggested as basal eutherians.
Some authors classify the taxa placed at the end of the above system as part of Placentalia sensu stricto. Depending on the author, this applies to taxa placed from (and inclusive of) Leptictida or Asioryctitheria or Adapisoriculidae down to (and inclusive of) Oxyprimus. Specifically, some older authors associated Cimolestidae with Ferae, Zalambdalestidae with Glires, Zhelestidae with Ungulata, and Leptictida and Adapisoriculidae with Lipotyphla or Archonta. All of these are now considered basal Eutheria.
Evolutionary history
Eutheria contains several extinct genera as well as larger groups, many with complicated taxonomic histories still not fully understood. Members of the Adapisoriculidae, Cimolesta and Leptictida have been previously placed within the outdated placental group Insectivora, while zhelestids have been considered primitive ungulates. However, more recent studies have suggested these enigmatic taxa represent stem group eutherians, more basal to Placentalia. Many non-placental eutherians are thought to have been insectivores, as is the case with many primitive mammals. However, the zhelestids are thought to have been herbivorous. Prior to the Cretaceous–Paleogene (K-Pg) extinction event, most eutherians were small and exhibited low anatomical and ecological diversity. Fossil evidence shows that the K-Pg extinction event led to a widespread increase in mammalian size and morphological diversity, with many small and medium-sized species going extinct and the surviving lineages evolving to have larger body sizes. Studies suggest that this overall increase in eutherian body size happened within a few hundred thousand years of the extinction. The extinction event also proved to be selective, as mammals with more generalized diets were more likely to survive than species with more specialized diets. In the early Paleocene, eutherians experienced an increase in taxonomic diversification, another result of the extinction event, leading to the evolution of the stem-primate Purgatorius, stem carnivorans Pristinictis and Ravenictis, and stem proboscidean Eritherium. During this period, eutherians also expanded into new ecological roles, including specialized herbivores and carnivores. The Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum further impacted eutherian morphological diversity, although the extent of its impacts is less studied.
The weakly favoured cladogram favours Boreoeutheria as a basal eutherian clade as sister to the Atlantogenata.

Phylogeny after Wang & Wang, 2023.

Below is a phylogeny from Gheerbrant & Teodori (2021):


Venomous mammals are mammals that produce venom, which they use to kill or disable prey, to defend themselves from predators or conspecifics or in agonistic encounters. Mammalian venoms form a heterogeneous group with different compositions and modes of action, from four orders of mammals: Eulipotyphla, Monotremata, Primates, and Chiroptera. To explain the rarity of venom delivery in Mammalia, Mark Dufton of the University of Strathclyde has suggested that modern mammalian predators do not need venom because they are able to kill quickly with their teeth or claws, whereas venom, no matter how sophisticated, requires time to disable prey.
In spite of the rarity of venom among extant mammals, venom may be an ancestral feature among mammals, as venomous spurs akin to those of the modern platypus are found in most non-therian Mammaliaformes groups.
Venom is much more common among other vertebrates; there are many more species of venomous reptiles (e.g. venomous snakes) and fish (e.g. stonefish). Some birds are poisonous to eat or touch (e.g. hooded pitohui) though no bird species is known to be venomous. There are only a few species of venomous amphibians; certain salamandrid salamanders can extrude sharp venom-tipped ribs.
Definitions
Several definitions of venomous animals have been proposed.
Bücherl states that venomous animals must possess at least one venom gland, a mechanism for excretion or extrusion of the venom, and apparatus with which to inflict wounds.
Mebs writes that venomous animals produce venom in a group of cells or gland, and have a tool, the venom apparatus, which delivers the venom by injection during a bite or sting. The venom apparatus in this definition encompasses both the gland and the injection device, which must be directly connected.
Fry et al. found that a venom is a secretion produced in a specialized gland in one animal and delivered to a target animal through the infliction of a wound. This secretion must contain molecules that disrupt normal physiological processes so as to facilitate feeding or defense by the producing animal. Additionally, the feeding secretion of hematophagous specialists (e.g. vampire bats) may be regarded as a specialized subtype of venom.
Evolutionary history and paleontology
Venomous mammals may have been more common in the past. Extratarsal spurs observed in extinct Mesozoic mammals are homologous with those seen in extant monotremes, and this feature was widespread. Whether or not these extratarsal spurs served as a venom delivery system is up for debate. While species such as Gobiconodon and Zhangeotherium possessed an extratarsal spur, they are hypothesized to be nonvenomous due to the lack of the spur being hollow or channeled, as seen in modern venomous Ornithorhynchus. Whether or not the lack of venom is due to the loss of a basal trait is difficult to determine with current fossil records.
In 2005, Fox and Scott presented evidence of a venom delivery system in late Paleocene fossils found in Alberta. Bisonalveus browni was a small eutherian in the order Cimolesta. Fox and Scott argue that the anterior grooves of the upper canines in B. browni serve as venom channels. They also present a group of isolated lower mammalian teeth of unknown species that also feature these grooves. These specimens were reexamined and rejected on the basis that the evidence provided may not be enough to prove the presence of venom in these species. Fox and Scott found no fossa that would be indicative of the presence of a venom gland. Also, grooved teeth are a feature of many species of nonvenomous mammals, so the presence of grooved teeth alone is not indicative of venom. There is no phylogenetic support for the presence of venom in B. browni.
The genus Beremendia may have featured individuals with a venom delivery system. The first lower incisor of several species exhibited a groove that may have served as a canal for venom to travel from a venom gland to the tip of the tooth. Support for a venom gland is seen in the fossa in the mandibular symphysis. Also, Beremendia is phylogenetically close to Solenodon, which has extant members that are venomous. Euchambersia is an example of a fossil therapsid (a relative of mammals) with grooved teeth, and maxillary fossa to match, indicating the presence of venom glands. Euchambersia differs in that the upper canines are the teeth that are grooved, and the grooves are almost enclosed, forming a tube.
More recently, nonhomologous species in the genus Nesophontes were hypothesized to be venomous. Species within Nesophontes exhibit grooved upper canines, similar to other species suspected of venom delivery. Where Nesophontes differ, however, is in the presence of grooves on the first and second upper premolars. The grooves are similar in morphology to helodermatid lizards, which feature a deep anterior groove and shallow posterior groove, as well as grooves on other teeth, which suggests that Nesophontes grooved premolars also aided in delivery of venom in addition to the upper canines. Nesophontes mandibular morphology is similar to that of existing venomous Eulipotyphlans, which further supports the hypothesis that they possessed venom.
ExamplesEulipotyphla (previously known as insectivores)
Vampire bats and Eulipotyphla are the only mammals so far observed to produce toxic saliva. These species have significantly enlarged and granular submaxillary salivary glands from which the toxic saliva is produced.
The Cuban solenodon (Atopogale cubana) and Hispaniolan solenodon (Solenodon paradoxus) look similar to large shrews. They both have venomous bites; the venom is delivered from modified salivary glands via grooves in their second lower incisors. Recent study has identified the gene regulatory network responsible for the development of venom delivery systems in these small mammals. Due to the overexpression of kallikreins in their saliva, solenodon bites cause vasodilation and may result in circulatory shock. It was reported that death was frequent among Hispaniolan solenodons kept together in the same enclosure, with bite marks on their feet being the only observable cause. Such use in competition may be a secondary aspect of the insectivore venom.

The northern short-tailed shrew (Blarina brevicauda), Mediterranean water shrew (Neomys anomalus), and Eurasian water shrew (Neomys fodiens) are capable of delivering a venomous bite. Other American short-tailed shrews—the southern short-tailed shrew (Blarina carolinensis), Elliot's short-tailed shrew (Blarina hylophaga), and Everglades short-tailed shrew (Blarina peninsulae) and the Transcaucasian water shrew (Neomys teres)—possibly also have a venomous bite. Shrews cache various prey in a comatose state, including earthworms, insects, snails, and to a lesser extent, small mammals such as voles and mice. This behaviour is an adaption to winter. In this context, the shrew venom acts as a tool to sustain a living hoard, thus ensuring food supply when capturing prey is difficult. This is especially important considering the high metabolic rate of shrews. Arguments against this suggest that the venom is used as a tool to hunt larger prey. Insectivores have an enhanced dependence on vertebrate food material, which is larger and more dangerous than their power to weight ratio would allow, thus requiring an extra asset to overcome these difficulties. Extant shrews do not have specialized venom delivery apparatus. Their teeth do not have channels, but a concavity on the first incisors may collect and transmit saliva from the submaxillary ducts, which open near the base of these teeth.
The European mole (Talpa europaea), and possibly other species of mole, have toxins in their saliva that can paralyze earthworms, allowing the moles to store them alive for later consumption.
Male platypus
Both male and female platypuses (Ornithorhynchus anatinus) hatch with keratinised spurs on the hind limbs, although the females lose these during development. The spurs are connected to the venom-producing crural glands, forming the crural system. During the mating season these glands become highly active, producing venom to be delivered by the channeled spur. Echidnas, the other monotremes, have spurs but no functional venom glands. Although not potent enough to be lethal to humans, platypus venom is nevertheless so excruciating that victims may sometimes be temporarily incapacitated. Platypus envenomation was fairly common when the animal was still hunted for its fur. Nowadays any close contact with the animal is rare and restricted to biologists, zookeepers and anglers (who occasionally catch them in fishing lines or nets).
When platypuses attack, they drive their hind legs together with considerable force so that the spurs are embedded in the flesh caught between and if venom is being produced, a few milliliters are injected by repeated jabbing. The spurs have enough strength to support the weight of the platypus, which often hangs from the victim, requiring assistance for removal.
Most of the evidence now supports the proposition that the venom system is used by males on one another as a weapon when competing for females, taking part in sexual selection. During this season, males become more aggressive and are found with punctures in their bodies, especially in the tail region. Adult male platypuses largely avoid each other, outside of this mating rivalry.
Platypus venom is likely retained from its distant non-monotreme ancestors, being the last living example of what was once a common characteristic among mammals. Fossil records show that venom delivery systems were not sexually dimorphic in ancestral monotremes. It has been hypothesized that venom spurs were once used for defense against predators. Proteins derived from platypus venom are being studied for potential analgesic properties.
Vampire bats
The definition of venom by Fry et al. (see Definitions) regards the feeding secretions of hematophagous (blood eating) specialists as a particular subtype of venom. In this context, the subfamily Desmodontinae represents the venomous mammals from the order Chiroptera. This group comprises the most well known venomous bat, the common vampire bat (Desmodus rotundus) and two other rare species, the hairy-legged vampire bat (Diphylla ecaudata) and the white-winged vampire bat (Diaemus youngi). These bats produce toxic saliva with anticoagulant properties and have a series of anatomical and physiological adaptations to allow nourishment based solely on blood. The majority of their prey do not perish from the attack or contact with the venom.
Primates
Slow lorises (of the genera Nycticebus and Xanthonycticebus) are accepted as the only known venomous primate. Slow loris venom was known in folklore in their host countries throughout southeast Asia for centuries, but dismissed by Western science until the 1990s. There are nine recognised species of this small-bodied nocturnal primate. They possess a dual composite venom consisting of saliva and brachial gland exudate, a malodourous fluid forming from an apocrine sweat gland on the animal's forearm. Both fluids have been demonstrated as being venomous individually and creating a more potent venom when mixed. Slow loris brachial gland exudate (BGE) has been shown to possess up to 142 volatile components, and possesses a variant of the cat allergen protein Fel-D1. The BGE has several ecological functions including anti-parasitic defence and communication. Slow loris saliva has been shown to be cytotoxic to human skin cells in laboratory experiments without the administration of BGE.
The venom is administered through morphologically distinct dentition in the form of an adapted toothcomb. In the wild envenomation occurs from intraspecific competition; whereby two slow lorises fight for mates, food or territory. Slow loris inflicted wounds are a major cause of premature death in zoo and wildlife slow loris populations, often resulting in festering and necrotic wounds. Slow loris envenomation in humans is rare, but can result in near fatal anaphylactic shock. A suite of additional effects of the venom have been documented including mild to permanent disfigurement and mobility loss. The study of slow loris venom was brought to the public attention in 2012 by the research of the primatologist Prof. K.A.I Nekaris and in her BBC documentary The Jungle Gremlins of Java.
Arguably venomous mammalsEulipotyphla
Hedgehogs (Erinaceinae) anoint their spines with a range of toxic and irritating substances. They will sometimes kill toads (Bufo sp.), bite into the toads' poison glands and smear the toxic mixture on their spines.
Afrosoricida
Tenrecs, which are similar in appearance to hedgehogs but from a different line of evolutionary descent, may also have separately evolved self-anointing behaviour.
Rodentia
The African crested rat (Lophiomys imhausi) has a mane of long, coarse black-and-white banded hairs which extends from the top of the animal's head to just beyond the base of the tail. This mane is bordered by a broad, white-bordered strip of hairs covering an area of glandular skin on the flank. When the animal is threatened or excited, the mane erects and this flank strip parts, exposing the glandular area. The hairs in this flank area are highly specialised; at the tips they are like ordinary hair, but are otherwise spongy, fibrous, and absorbent. The rat is known to deliberately chew the roots and bark of the poison-arrow tree (Acokanthera schimperi), so-called because human hunters extract a toxin, ouabain, to coat arrows that can kill an elephant. After the rat has chewed the tree, it deliberately slathers the resulting mixture onto its specialised flank hairs which are adapted to rapidly absorb the poisonous mixture, acting like a lamp wick. It thereby creates a defense mechanism that can sicken or even kill predators which attempt to bite it.
Chemical defence
Skunks (Mephitidae) can eject a noxious fluid from glands near their anus. It is not only foul smelling, but can cause skin irritation and, if it gats in the eyes, temporary blindness. Some members of the mustelid family, such as the striped polecat (Ictonyx striatus), also have this capacity to an extent. Pangolins can also emit a noxious smelling fluid from glands near the anus. The greater long-nosed armadillo can release a disagreeable musky odor when threatened.


Marine mammal training refers to the training and caretaking of various marine mammals, including dolphins, orcas (killer whales), sea lions, and walruses. This discipline involves teaching these animals behaviors for purposes such as performing in shows, scientific research, military operations, or health and enrichment. Caretaking elements include ensuring the animals' proper diet, habitat maintenance, and health monitoring.
Methodology
Operant conditioning employs two kinds of reinforcement to instruct animals in performing behaviors: Primary reinforcement, which involves unconditioned rewards such as food, and secondary reinforcement, which includes learned rewards that teach reinforcing properties through their connection to primary reinforcers. Examples of secondary reinforcers include tactile interaction, such as petting or grooming from trainers, or engagement with enrichment tools, such as balls. The timeliness of reinforcement must be immediate for the animal to recognize the correct behavior. Trainers facilitate this through a bridging stimulus—a signal indicating the animal has performed the desired action correctly. Common forms of bridging stimuli include whistling sounds, usage of training clickers, or visual cues like hand gestures. These stimuli serve as a bridge between the behavior's execution and the receipt of a reward, enabling immediate feedback that enhances learning speed and focus, particularly when direct reinforcement is not feasible.
Shaping is a gradual method of teaching through successive steps, allowing the achievement of complex behaviors. Trainers use distinct signals to denote specific behaviors, guiding animals toward the desired response. In cases where an animal either fails to respond or exhibits an incorrect behavior, trainers employ a technique known as the Least Reinforcing Stimulus (LRS), wherein they pause for three seconds before attempting the signal again. It is similar to a "time-out". This approach emphasizes the avoidance of coercion and punishment, adhering to a philosophy of positive reinforcement and patience in animal training.
History of Marine Mammal Training
Applied animal training employs many of the behavioral training techniques described by B.F. Skinner, who developed an experimental analysis of behavior through the use of rats and pigeons in operant chambers. During Skinner's pigeon project, he and a team of graduate students, including Marian and Keller Breland, trained pigeons to use screens to steer missiles to hit a target. However, this project was never operational. After this project, Skinner and the Breland couple were interested in potential applications of behavioral technology and operant principles. In 1944, the Brelands opened a business called Animal Behavior Enterprises (ABE) on a farm they purchased. They used operant conditioning techniques to train various animals for commercials, advertisements, and entertainment purposes. In 1950, the two opened a tourist attraction in Hot Springs, Arkansas known as the I.Q. Zoo. This zoo featured exhibits where trained animals would demonstrate many different behaviors, from dropping small balls into a hoop to hitting balls with bats on a miniature baseball field, and much more. In 1951, the Brelands wrote an article titled "A Field of Applied Animal Psychology", where they proposed that modern behavioral science and professional animal training be brought together through applied animal psychology. In the late 1950s into the early 1960s, they promoted and patented a dog and clicker training program called Master Mind.
Through the 1950s-1960s, the Brelands and ABE adapted operant methods to use with marine mammals and began a training program at Marine Studios. The program included training and developing new behaviors, staff training in operant methods, and prop design. When working with a dolphin named Splash, the Brelands were able to precisely shape and control behavior by using bridging stimuli. In 1955, the couple wrote the first operant training manual for dolphins, which included general principles such as stimulus, bridging, shaping, differentiation, extinction, props, and schedules of reinforcement. It also included individual act instructions such as descriptions of act goals, target behaviors, signaling instructions, specific training directions, and various potential educational or promotional uses for trained dolphins. ABE started the use of training logs to systematize and standardize training and to track the animals' progress. They scripted and created shows and taught others how to train using operant technology. Other marine parks that use operant training can be traced back to the ABE and the spread of behavioral technology, which helped the marine animal training industry to grow rapidly.
The world's first oceanarium, Marine Studios, was located in St. Augustine, Florida, and opened on June 23, 1938. This park was originally designed as an underwater movie studio, educational facility, and marine research center, but it became a popular tourist attraction. Park visitors could watch marine animals from an observation deck or through the clear walls of the saltwater pools. Atlantic bottlenose dolphins were featured in the first major dolphin attraction, named the Top Deck Show. Personnel used a form of shaping by requiring the dolphins to perform varying and increasingly higher jumps. Personnel would hold fish over the water and dolphins would leap into the air and take fish out of their hands or their mouth.
Marine Studios hired a former sea lion trainer from the Ringling Brothers and Barnum & Bailey Circus named Adolf Frohn to train the dolphins to play with inner tubes on command. Frohn had no previous experience working with dolphins. He worked with a two-year-old male dolphin named Flippy beginning in September 1949. Frohn first worked to familiarize Flippy with his presence and grow comfortable accepting handfed food. The trainer did so by rowing a small boat around the lagoon to stay near the young dolphin. Flippy learned six tricks: honking a bulb horn, ringing a bell, raising a flag, retrieving and catching a ball, pulling a surfboard ridden by a woman or dog, and jumping through a hoop. Marine Studios announced the world's first trained dolphin to the public in February 1951. Frohn kept his training methods secretive, intentionally not keeping training records, method instructions, or allowing assistants to participate in training. He used positive reinforcement and believed in the importance of a trusting, patient, and affectionate relationship between a trainer and an animal.
The rising popularity of marine mammal attractions led to the creation of additional parks such as Sea Life Park Hawaii and SeaWorld. Sea Life Park was opened in 1963 and was founded by Taylor Allderdice Pryor and her first husband. Pryor used Ronald Turner's operant training manual for dolphins and was able to train dolphins and teach training staff about operant conditioning. These methods were applied to training Spinner, Kiko, and Pacific bottlenose dolphins. Pryor's writings about her experiences played a major role in the spread of the use of operant psychology in animal training. SeaWorld was founded by George Millay, Ken Norris, and other investors. In 1964, Millay hired Kent Burgess, who was from ABE, to be SeaWorld's Director of Animal Training. Burgess used his experience from Marineland of the Pacific and Marine Studios to apply behavioral training in a structured system that included behavioral record-keeping, manuals, and courses that train in behavioral psychology. Burgess used operant psychology to train a killer whale named Shamu. After two months of training, Shamu performed in shows for the public regularly. These shows included behaviors such as opening her mouth to have her teeth brushed and examined, showing her fluke reflexes, having her heart checked, kissing her doctor on the cheek, and jumping to a target 15 feet in the air. The training program that Burgess implemented was valid, reliable, and efficient in all animal acts. The animal's behavior was the focus at Sea World through the use of operant psychology instead of the trainer's skill.
Schooling for Marine Mammal Training
University of Alaska Fairbanks, University of California Santa Cruz, California State University, Cornell University, University of Delaware, Duke University, University of Hawaii at Manoa, and University of Maine are a few universities that offer schooling for marine mammal training. Most of these schools provide a schooling program with field experiences integrated with classroom and laboratory courses. While a bachelor's degree is not mandatory for this career, it is more beneficial to have at least a 4-year degree.
Most marine mammal trainers earn their degrees in marine biology, psychology, and/or animal behavior (ethology). Though formal education is very important, it is often better to learn and become familiar with marine mammal behaviors through first-hand experience, under the guidance of an experienced trainer.
International Marine Animal Trainers' Association
The International Marine Animal Trainers' Association (IMATA), established in 1972, is an organization dedicated to fostering communication, professionalism, and cooperation among individuals engaged in the service of marine life. Its mission encompasses the exchange of information and expertise related to the care, training, and conservation of marine animals, with a strong emphasis on ethical practices and the enhancement of animal welfare.


The Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA) was the first act of the United States Congress to call specifically for an ecosystem approach to wildlife management.
Authority
MMPA was signed into law on October 21, 1972, by President Richard Nixon and took effect 60 days later on December 21, 1972. It prohibits the "taking" of marine mammals, and enacts a moratorium on the import, export, and sale of any marine mammal, along with any marine mammal part or product within the United States. The Act defines "take" as "the act of hunting, killing, capture, and/or harassment of any marine mammal; or, the attempt at such." The MMPA defines harassment as "any act of pursuit, torment or annoyance which has the potential to either: a. injure a marine mammal in the wild, or b. disturb a marine mammal by causing disruption of behavioral patterns, which includes, but is not limited to, migration, breathing, nursing, breeding, feeding, or sheltering." The MMPA provides for enforcement of its prohibitions, and for the issuance of regulations to implement its legislative goals.
Authority to manage the MMPA was divided between the Secretary of the Interior through the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service), and the Secretary of Commerce, which is delegated to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Subsequently, a third federal agency, the Marine Mammal Commission (MMC), was established to review existing policies and make recommendations to the Service and the NOAA better implement the MMPA. Coordination between these three federal agencies is necessary in order to provide the best management practices for marine mammals.
Under the MMPA, the Service is responsible for ensuring the protection of sea otters and marine otters, walruses, polar bears, three species of manatees, and dugongs.  NOAA was given responsibility to conserve and manage pinnipeds including seals and sea lions and cetaceans such as whales and dolphins.
NOAA Responsibilities
The NOAA enforces the Marine Mammal Protection Act through the implementation and enforcement of various policies and regulations to properly manage marine mammal populations. The NOAA does this through the identification of violations of the MMPA, coordinating efforts to aid stranded and entangled mammals, and conduct proper rehabilitation and release of injured marine mammals. The NOAA is also responsible for providing stock assessment reports on marine mammals under their jurisdiction which includes whales, dolphins, porpoises, seals, and sea lions. Stock assessment reports serve to identify trends in marine mammal populations, identify potential threats to said population, and whether current conservation efforts are effective and if adjustments need to be made to ensure effective enforcement of the MMPA.
The specific information that is included in all stock assessments are the geographic range of the stock being studied, current trends and productivity rates for the stock, potential biological removal levels which is defined under the MMPA as "the maximum number of animals, not including natural mortalities, that may be removed from a marine mammal stock while allowing that stock to reach or maintain its optimum sustainable population", an estimation of mortality and injury rate caused by humans, potential threats to conservation efforts and current status of the stock and a minimum population estimation.
These stock assessments are created through research conducted by programs at NOAA research science centers which are located in Hawaii, Massachusetts, Alaska, Florida, Washington, and California. Research contributions are also made by researchers not affiliated with the previously mentioned programs as well.
Marine Mammal Commission Responsibilities
The Marine Mammal Commission (MMC) was created in 1972 through the MMPA to serve as an organization that provides oversight over conservation policies, regulations and programs being carried out to ensure they are carried out effectively by the federal agencies responsible for them. Their responsibilities also include ensuring the United States adhere to international agreements that relate to marine mammal conservation "including, but not limited to, the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling, the Whaling Convention Act of 1949, the Interim Convention on the Conservation of North Pacific Fur Seals, and the Fur Seal Act of 1966." The MMC is also responsible for the review of the research programs conducted for the purpose of the MMPA as well as authorizing permits for the purpose of research, conservation or public display. If the MMC finds that the current conservation efforts are shown to be ineffective in protecting species identified under the MMPA, they are responsible for effectively communicating with federal officials such as the Secretaries of State, Commerce or the Interior the recommended measures needed to be taken to ensure the effectiveness of the MMPA and the protection of marine mammals under this act. These recommendations can come in the form of implementation of international agreements, revisions to the endangered and threatened species list as deemed appropriate under the Endangered Species Act of 1973, and provisions that may need to be made to the MMPA.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services Responsibilities
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services are responsible for managing the take through the use of permits and other authorization as well as financially supporting efforts to help marine mammals that fall victim to stranding and relevant research efforts. Similar to the NOAA, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services conduct stock assessments of marine mammal populations under their jurisdiction which include walrus, manatees, sea otters, and polar bears. They are also responsible for the creation and implementation of conservation plans which often occur in collaboration with industries which can potentially impact marine mammal populations of particular concern.
Marine mammal permits and international coordination
The MMPA prohibits the take and exploitation of any marine mammal without appropriate authorization, which may only be given by the Service.  Permits may be issued for scientific research, public display, and the importation/exportation of marine mammal parts and products upon determination by the Service that the issuance is consistent with the MMPA's regulations. The two types of permits issued by the National Marine Fisheries Service's Office of Protected Resources are incidental and directed. Incidental permits, which allow for some unintentional taking of small numbers of marine mammal, are granted to U.S. citizens who engage in a specified activity other than commercial fishing in a specified geographic area. Directed permits are required for any proposed marine mammal scientific research activity that involves taking marine mammals.
Applications for such permits are reviewed and issued the Service's Division of Management Authority, through the International Affairs office.  This office also houses the Division of International Conservation, which is directly responsible for coordinating international activities for marine mammal species found in both U.S. and International waters, or are absent from U.S. waters.  Marine mammal species inhabiting both U.S. and International waters include the West Indian manatee, sea otter, polar bear, and Pacific walrus.  Species not present in U.S. waters include the West African and Amazonian manatee, dugong, Atlantic walrus, and marine otter.
Marine mammal conservation in the field
In efforts to conserve and manage marine mammal species, the Service has appointed field staff dedicated to working with partners to conduct population censuses, assess population health, develop and implement conservation plans, promulgate regulations, and create cooperative relationships internationally.
Various Marine Mammal Management offices are located on either coast.  The Service's Marine Mammal Management office in Anchorage, Alaska is responsible for the management and conservation of polar bears, Pacific walruses, and northern sea otters in Alaska.  Northern sea otters present in Washington state are managed by the Western Washington Field Office, while southern sea otters residing in California are managed by the Ventura Field Office.  West Indian manatee populations extend from Texas to Rhode Island, and are also present in the Caribbean Sea; however, this species is most prevalent near Florida (the Florida subspecies) and Puerto Rico (the Antillean subspecies).  The Service's Jacksonville Field Office manages the Florida manatee, while the Boqueron Field Office manages the Antillean manatee.
The polar bear, southern sea otter, marine otter, all three species of manatees, and the dugong are also concurrently listed under the Endangered Species Act (ESA).
Raw and unworked walrus ivory and bones from Alaska are exported to the Indonesian island of Bali where local artisans carve them into North American motives (salmon, wolves, cowboys). Research by a team led by EcoVerde Global Consulting showed that these items are then re-exported to the USA circumventing the US Marine Mammal Act
Amendments
Amendments enacted in 1981 established conditions for permits to be granted to take marine mammals "incidentally" in the course of commercial fishing. In addition, the amendments provided additional conditions and procedures for transferring management authority to the States, and authorized appropriations through FY 1984.
Policies created in 1982

Some marine mammal species or stocks may be in danger of extinction or depletion as a result of human activities.
These species or stocks must not be permitted to fall below their optimum sustainable population level (depleted)
Measures should be taken to replenish these species or stocks
There is inadequate knowledge of the ecology and population dynamics
Marine mammals have proven to be resources of great international significance.
The 1984 amendments established conditions to be satisfied as a basis for importing fish and fish products from nations engaged in harvesting yellowfin tuna with purse seines and other commercial fishing technology, as well as authorized appropriations for agency activities through FY 1988.
Amended in 1988

The establishment of conditions and procedures for the Secretaries of Commerce and Interior to review the status of populations to determine if they should be listed as "depleted" (below optimal, sustainable population numbers or listed as threatened or endangered);
The preparation of conservation plans for any species listed as depleted, including a requirement that such plans be modeled after recovery plans developed pursuant to the Endangered Species Act;
The listing of conditions under which permits may be issued to take marine mammals for the protection and welfare of the animals, including importation, public display, scientific research, and enhancing the survival or recovery of a species; and
A reward system under which the Secretary of the Treasury can pay up to $2500 to individuals providing information leading to convictions for violations of the Act.
Amended in 1994

Certain exceptions to the take prohibitions, such as for Alaska Native subsistence and permits and authorizations for scientific research;
A program to authorize and control the taking of marine mammals incidental to commercial fishing operations;
Preparation of stock assessments for all marine mammal stocks in waters under U.S. jurisdiction; and
Studies of pinniped-fishery interactions.
Co-management with Indigenous communities
Under the MMPA amended in 1994, in Section 119, NMFS and FWS was authorized to form the cooperative agreements (co-management plan) with Alaska Native Organizations (ANOs). This allows indigenous tribal government can engage in their territorial marine mammal protection and subsistence taking issues through individual co-management agreements which can be established with NOAA, USFWS, MMC, or other MMPA-affiliated agencies. Co-management is viewed as the practice of indigenous sovereignty and self-determination. Co-management under Section 119 includes the following activities:

Collecting and analyzing data on marine mammal populations
Monitoring the subsistence harvest of marine mammals
Participating in marine mammal research conducted by federal and state governments, academic institutions, and private organizations; and,
Developing co-management structures with federal and state agencies.
Alaska Nanuuq Commission (ANC) represents tribes for polar bears management with USFWS. In this partnership, the subsistence take of polar bear is legal according to MMPA, yet the prohibition is placed on taking females with cubs and harassment. Along with the co-management, Alaska Scientific Review Group is set up, with indigenous entities involved, to advise stock assessment and revise method for assessment.
Alaska Beluga Whale Committee (ABWC) was founded in 1988 to manage beluga subsistence hunting in Alaska. After the MMPA amended, ABWC starts to develop a co-management plan with National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) aiming to become an "umbrella organization concerned with statewide, national and international affairs." With the founding from NMFS, ABWC focus on facilitating scientific communication for the public, harvest monitoring, beluga tracking, aerial survey, genetics-based stock studies. The regional groups of ABWC are designate to "develop local management plans, hunting guide-lines and means of enforcement."
Effectiveness
The Marine Mammal Protection Act has conservation benefits beyond US boundaries. The Act requires imported fisheries products to minimize incidental mortality and severe injury of marine mammals aligning to the US domestic standards. Yet it is difficult to expect this comparability from all exporting countries due to lack of fisheries records on bycatches and standardized protective measures which is causing unintentional harms.
The Act emphasizes the recovery and prevention of the depletion of strategic marine mammal stocks. Under Section 118, Take Reduction Plan aims within six months of implementation to reduce incidental mortality and severe injury from fishery and approach zero mortality rate in five years. The Plan includes:

Review of the final stock assessment report for each marine mammal addressed by the Plan and any substantial new information.
Estimate of the total number and, if possible, age and gender, of animals from the stock that is incidentally killed or seriously injured each year during the course of commercial fishing operations, by fishery.
Recommended regulatory or voluntary measures for the reduction of incidental mortality and serious injury.
Recommended dates for achieving the specific objectives of the plan.
The plan is developed with a team involving representatives from fishing industry, management councils, governmental agencies, scientific community, and conservation organization. The consensus from the representatives is then submitted to NOAA for review then through the public comment. As the Plan is finalized, NOAA has the duty to monitor its implementation with the team.
Yet, the Plans are uneven or unstandardized in practice to meet its statutory requirement. Successful plans are often based upon mandated, quantitative metrics, and consistent monitoring programs.
Findings
Congress found that: all species and population stocks of marine mammals are (or may be are) in danger of extinction or depletion due to human activities; these mammals should not be permitted to diminish below their optimum sustainable population; measures should be taken immediately to replenish any of these mammals that have diminished below that level, and efforts should be made to protect essential habitats; there is inadequate knowledge of the ecology and population dynamics of these mammals; negotiations should be undertaken immediately to encourage international arrangements for research and conservation of these mammals.
Congress declared that marine mammals are resources of great international significance (aesthetic, recreational and economic), and should be protected and encouraged to develop to the greatest extent feasible commensurate with sound policies of resource management. The primary management objective should be to maintain the health and stability of the marine ecosystem. The goal is to obtain an optimum sustainable population within the carrying capacity of the habitat.


Maras, subfamily Dolichotinae, are a group of rodents in the family Caviidae. These large relatives of guinea pigs are common in the Patagonian steppes of Argentina, but also live in Paraguay and elsewhere in South America. The two extant species are the Patagonian mara and the Chacoan mara. Traditionally, both species have been included in the genus Dolichotis, but a 2020 study by the American Society of Mammalogists found significant difference to warrant resurrecting the genus Pediolagus for the Chacoan mara. Several extinct genera are also known.
Description
Maras have stocky bodies, three sharp-clawed digits on the hind feet, and four digits of the fore feet. They have been described as resembling long-legged rabbits; while standing, they can also resemble a small ungulate. Patagonian maras can run at speeds up to 29 km/h (18 mph). The Patagonian species can weigh over 11 kg (24 lb) in adulthood. The average weight of adult male Patagonian maras is 8.3 kg (18 lb) and in adult females is 7.75 kg (17.1 lb). Meanwhile, the Chacoan mara, though still large for a rodent, is much smaller, weighing around 1 to 3 kg (2.2 to 6.6 lb).
Most maras have brown heads and bodies, dark (almost black) rumps with a white fringe around the base, and white bellies.
Maras may amble, hop in a rabbit-like fashion, gallop, or bounce on all fours. They have been known to leap up to 6 ft (1.8 m).
Maras mate for life and may have from one to three offspring each year. Mara young are very well-developed and can start grazing within 24 hours. They use a crèche system, where one pair of adults keeps watch over all the young in the crèche. If they spot danger, the young rush below ground into a burrow, and the adults are left to run to escape.
Genera
Dolichotis
†Eodolichotis
†Pliodolichotis
†Propediolagus
†Rhodanodolichotis
Interaction with humans
Patagonian maras are often kept in zoos or as pets and are also known as "Patagonian cavies" or "Patagonian hares". They can be quite social with humans if raised with human interaction from a young age, though they avoid people in the wild. Maras may even change their habits from coming out in day to becoming nocturnal, simply to avoid social interaction.
Gallery


Mammal is the second studio album by the Irish black metal band Altar of Plagues. It was released through Candlelight Records in Europe and Profound Lore Records in North America, each with different artwork.
Reception
The album received positive reviews from most critics. Brandon Stosuy of Pitchfork selected Mammal as 18th album of the top 40 metal albums of 2011.
Track listingPersonnel
Altar of Plagues
James Kelly – vocals, guitars, keyboards
Dave Condon – vocals, bass
Johnny King – drums
Technical personnel
Timo Ketola – artwork (Profound Lore version)
Daniel Sesé – artwork (Candlelight Records version)
Ross O'Donovan – engineering
Tadhg Healy – assistant engineer
Tore Stjerna – mastering
James Kelly – production


Approximately 100 species of mammal are known to inhabit, or to have recently inhabited, the Korean Peninsula and its surrounding waters. This includes a few species that were introduced in the 20th century; the coypu was introduced for farming in the 1990s, and the muskrat was introduced in the early 20th century into the Russian Far East, and was subsequently first recorded in Korea in the Tumen River basin in 1965. The Siberian tiger is the national animal of South Korea. The Siberian tiger and Amur leopard have most likely been extirpated from Korea, but are still included in standard lists of Korean mammals.
Most Korean mammal species are found only in a small part of Korea, or have been extirpated by human activity. The large southeastern island of Jeju, and the rugged northeastern Paektu Mountain region, are particularly known for their distinctive mammal species. Several species, including the Dsinezumi shrew, are found only on Jeju, while many other species, such as the wild boar, are absent or extirpated from there. Some mammals, such as the Manchurian wapiti, are considered natural monuments of North Korea, while others, such as the spotted seal, are considered natural monuments of South Korea.
Order Artiodactyla: even-toed ungulatesOrder Carnivora: carnivoresOrder Cetacea: whalesOrder Erinaceomorpha: hedgehogsOrder Soricomorpha: shrews and molesOrder Chiroptera: batsOrder Lagomorpha: lagomorphsOrder Primates: prosimians and simiansOrder Rodentia: rodents


The European Land Mammal Mega Zones (abbreviation: ELMMZ, more commonly known as European land mammal ages or ELMA) are zones in rock layers that have a specific assemblage of fossils (biozones) based on occurrences of fossil assemblages of European land mammals. These biozones cover most of the Cenozoic, with particular focus having been paid to the Neogene and Paleogene systems (i.e. rock layers which are 65.5 to 2.588 million years old), the Quaternary has several competing systems. In cases when fossils of mammals are abundant, stratigraphers and paleontologists can use these biozones as a more practical regional alternative to the stages of the official ICS geologic timescale. European Land Mammal Mega Zones are often also confusingly referred to as ages, stages, or intervals.
Biostratigraphic methods
Mammal zones were, like all biozones, established using geographic place names where fossil materials were obtained. The basic unit of measure is the first/last boundary statement. This shows that the first appearance event of one taxon is known to predate the last appearance event of another. If two taxa are found in the same fossil quarry or at the same stratigraphic horizon, then their age-range zones overlap.
The terrestrial stratigraphy of the Cenozoic is more difficult than that of marine deposits. The geologic timescale of the ICS is therefore based on marine fossils, that don't occur in terrestrial sediments. This makes the correlation of terrestrial deposits with the ICS timescale often difficult. Correlation is possible when marine deposits interfinger with terrestrial deposits (resulting from a series of transgressions and regressions of the sea during deposition), but this isn't the case everywhere. A fine stratigraphic division of the terrestrial record can in most places only be made using fossils of land species. Small mammals are often the best choice as they are quite abundant in the terrestrial record, especially their teeth. Teeth have an even better chance of preservation than bones.
The European mammalian biozones were established for the Paleogene (66-23.03 Mya, 8 zones) and Neogene (23.03-2.58 Mya, 7 zones) separately. Some of these, especially for the Neogene, were already established in the 19th century. The Villafranchian was, for example, introduced by Lorenzo Pareto in 1865. A finer subdivision was established by Pierre Mein in 1975, who divided the Neogene in 17 zones, known as the MN zonation, indicated by the letters MN (Mammal Neogene) and a number.
Similarly, a more detailed subdivision for the Paleogene period was established. There are 30 such Mammal Paleogene zones (MP1 to MP30, numbered from old to young).
Paleogene European mammal zones
There are 30 Mammal Paleogene zones covering the Paleogene (66-23.03 Mya).
Neogene European mammal zones
European Land Mammal Mega Zones most often have their bases at first appearances (FAD, First Appearance Date) of a certain species or genus. The numbers are higher for younger zones. Due to a redefinition of the boundary between the Neogene and Quaternary periods, MN 17 is now in fact considered a Quaternary biozone.
Quaternary European mammal zones
The first zonation for the Quaternary of Europe was proposed by Azzaroli in 1967. This was then expanded by Gliozzi et al. in 1997 to make a system of 3 'ages' subdivided into 13 'faunal units'. The scheme does not define boundaries but instead is accompanied by a range chart, where the entry and exit dates for the taxa are indicated. Each zone is named after a reference locality. Most of the reference locations are in Italy but the scheme is used in other European regions. The mammal ages and Faunal Units (FU) after Gliozzi et al. are:

In 1982, Guérin proposed an alternative scheme, which extended the MN zonation scheme for the Neogene with additional units to cover the Quaternary. There have been further updates since. The MNQ (Mammal Neogene Quaternary) scheme added an additional 12 units in total, MNQ 16–27.
For small mammals there is a third scheme, the MmQ, published by Agustí, Moyà‐Solà, and Pons‐Moyà in 1987. The scheme includes some large mammals for reference and thus has a wider application.
Other continental mammalian biozones
Asian land mammal age
Mammal Paleogene zone
North American land mammal age
South American land mammal age
African land mammal age


Dichodon is an extinct genus of Palaeogene artiodactyls belonging to the family Xiphodontidae. It was endemic to Western Europe and lived from the middle Eocene up to the earliest Oligocene. The genus was first erected by the British naturalist Richard Owen in 1848 based on dental remains from the fossil beds in Hordle, England. He noticed similar dentitions to contemporary artiodactyls like those of the Anoplotheriidae and Dichobunidae and references the name of the genus Dichobune. Eventually, it was found to be more closely related to Xiphodon and now includes 11 species, although one of them may be synonymous.
Dichodon had brachyodont (low-crowned) dentition, its premolars being elongated similar to other xiphodonts. However, it differs from them by the generally stronger but varied degrees of elongation of the premolars and "molarization" of the fourth premolars, in which the earliest species had triangular top fourth premolars while later species had quadrangular ones. Its snout is also shorter and narrower compared to that of Xiphodon. The different morphologies of the two genera suggest different dietary specializations of folivory (leaf-eating), but the postcranial morphology of Dichodon remains poorly known compared to that of Xiphodon.
Dichodon lived in western Europe when it was an archipelago that was isolated from the rest of Eurasia, meaning that it lived in a tropical-subtropical environment with various other animals that also evolved with strong levels of endemism. The genus was speciose, composed of many small-sized species as well as medium-sized ones. D. cuspidatum and D. stehlini were especially large but are known only from single fossil localities. The small-sized D. frohnstettensis and the medium-sized D. cervinum, in comparison, frequently occur in many localities dating from the late middle to late Eocene.
It and other xiphodont genera went extinct by the Grande Coupure extinction/faunal turnover event, coinciding with shifts towards further glaciation and seasonality plus dispersals of Asian immigrant faunas into western Europe. The causes of its extinction are attributed to negative interactions with immigrant faunas (resource competition, predation), environmental turnover from climate change, or some combination of the two.
TaxonomyResearch historyEarly history
In 1848, after having recognized ungulates as a taxonomic group defined by the Artiodactyla and Perissodactyla, British naturalist Richard Owen erected the genus Dichodon based on its "peculiar" dentition, classifying it as a member of the former. The dental and cranial fossils of Dichodon were uncovered were from the Eocene beds of Hordle, England by Alexander Pytts Falconer. Owen said that the dentition of Dichodon resembled those of both Merycopotamus and Dichobune because of the similar upper and lower jaws but also argued that the molars resembled those of anoplotheriids. Deriving it from the quantity and sharpness of the cusps of the teeth, he erected the binomial name Dichodon cuspidatus. The etymology of the genus name Dichodon is derived from the Ancient Greek words δίχα (two) and ὀδούς (tooth) in reference to the genus Dichobune, due to having similar molar mounds. Owen in 1857 then recorded that the fossils of Dichodon that he previously described from 1857-1858 were from an immature individual with milk teeth for a total of 32 teeth while the adult dentition based on fossils collected near Alum Bay in the Isle of Wight by a "Dr. Wright" had a complete dental set of 44 teeth.
In 1852, German palaeontologist Christian Erich Hermann von Meyer, writing to his colleague Heinrich Georg Bronn, told of fossils of Dichodon from the locality of Frohnstetten whose dentition did not resemble that of the species D. cuspidatus. He determined based on its molars that it was therefore a new species, which he named D. Frohnstettensis.
In an 1874 monograph published in 1876, Russian palaeontologist Vladimir Kovalevsky recognized three valid species of Dichodon: D. cuspidatus, D. Valdense, and D. Frohnstettense. Kovalevsky apparently did not specify the attributed fossils and etymology of D. Valdense, but Swiss palaeontologist Hans Georg Stehlin in 1910 suggested that Kovalevsky based the species on fossils previously described, but not named, by François Jules Pictet de la Rive. He stated that there was a small-sized species from the Swiss locality of Egerkingen, that it was smaller than D. Frohnstettense and that it would have been roughly the size of Cainotherium. Deciding not to establish a new genus because of incomplete material, he assigned to Dichodon the species D. simplex based on the simplicity of the premolars. The same year, British naturalist William Henry Flower expressed doubt regarding whether Dichodon was distinct enough from Xiphodon based on the different last premolar morphologies.

In 1885, British naturalist Richard Lydekker taxonomically reviewed Dichodon and other artiodactyls. He confirmed that it had a complete dental formula, selenodont molars, and elongated premolars like Xiphodon but also noted that its limb anatomy was unknown. He referenced two species but did not give mention to the others: D. cuspidatus and D. cervinus, the latter of which was previously erected and classified to the genus Dichobune by Owen in 1841. German palaeontologist Max Schlosser established the binomial name Tetraselenodon Kowalevskii based on fossils from the French department of Tarn-et-Garonne in 1886. He justified the genus by arguing that Pictet incorrectly referred its fossil material to Dichodon due to the dentition being simple-looking in form.
The Swiss palaeontologist Ludwig Ruetimeyer in 1891 described another species from Egerkingen whose fossil remains were smaller than those of D. cuspidatus. He stated that the upper jaw molar row of the newer species measured 17 mm (0.67 in) to 20 mm (0.79 in) in length while its lower jaw molar row length measured 22 mm (0.87 in), in contrast to D. cuspidatus with an upper molar row length of 39 mm (1.5 in) and a lower molar row length of 44 mm (1.7 in). Ruetimeyer assigned it the species name D. Cartieri.
Later revisions
For his 1910 monograph on artiodactyls, Stehlin, as part of his work in reaffirming Catodontherium as a valid genus, said that D. valdense, despite being an older name than C. robiacense, may not have been clearly defined. He also supported the validities of the other species D. cuspidatum, D. cervinum, D. frohnstettense, D. simplex, and D. cartieri. The Swiss palaeontologist additionally erected two species of Dichodon: the first was D. subtile from the Swiss locality of Mormont, which he said was a small species differing from others by the elongation and narrowing of the premolars. The second that he recognized was D. Rütimeyeri from Egerkingen, which he said was about the same size as D. Cartieri. He also synonymized Tetraselenodon with Dichodon and invalidated T.  Kowalevskyi because of the dentition's similarity to that of D. cervinum.
In 1972, the French palaeontologist Jean Sudre erected D. lugdunensis, another small-sized species, based on dentition from the French locality of Lissieu. He said that the new species would have been part of a different lineage from that of D. cartieri plus that it was larger than D. simplex. He also confirmed that T. kowalevski is a synonym of D. cervinum. The next year, Sudre named another species D. stehlini from a large-sized molar originally from the locality of La Débruge in France. All species of Dichodon previously recognized as valid since Stehlin's 1910 revisions were listed by Jerry J. Hooker in 1986, although he emended D. subtile to D. subtilis and D. frohnstettense to D. frohnstettensis out of correcting naming incongruencies.
In 1988, Sudre established another species named D. vidalenci based on isolated teeth from Le Bretou in France, which he noted had very elongated premolars, and listed Dichodon sp. based on isolated short premolars. Hooker and Marc Weidmann in 2000 listed D. vidalenci as a possible synonym of D. subtilis but otherwise listed all other species except for D. stehlini. In addition, they erected the medium-sized species D. biroi from the Swiss municipality of Éclépens, establishing that they named the species after Philippe Biro because he collected the dental holotype specimens in 1946.
Classification
Dichodon belongs to the Xiphodontidae, a Palaeogene artiodactyl family endemic to western Europe that lived from the middle Eocene to the early Oligocene (~44 Ma to 33 Ma). It was suggested to have been a monotypic member of its own family, the Dichodontidae, by the American palaeontologist Edward Drinker Cope in 1889, although this is not accepted by modern authors. Like the other contemporary endemic artiodactyl families of western Europe, the evolutionary origins of the Xiphodontidae are poorly known. The Xiphodontidae is generally thought to have first appeared by MP14 faunal unit of the Mammal Palaeogene zones, making them the first representatives of artiodactyls with selenodont dentition to have appeared in the landmass along with the Amphimerycidae. More specifically, the first xiphodonts to appear were the genera Dichodon and Haplomeryx by MP14. Dichodon and Haplomeryx continued to persist into the late Eocene while Xiphodon made its first appearance by MP16. Another xiphodont, Paraxiphodon, is known to have occurred only in MP17a localities. The former three genera lived up to the early Oligocene where they have been recorded to have all gone extinct as a result of the Grande Coupure faunal turnover event.
The phylogenetic relations of the Xiphodontidae as well as the Anoplotheriidae, Mixtotheriidae and Cainotheriidae have been elusive due to the selenodont morphologies (or having crescent-shaped ridges) of the molars, which were convergent with tylopods or ruminants. Some researchers considered the selenodont families Anoplotheriidae, Xiphodontidae, and Cainotheriidae to be within Tylopoda due to postcranial features that were similar to the tylopods from North America in the Palaeogene. Other researchers consider them more closely related to ruminants than tylopods based on dental morphology. Different phylogenetic analyses have produced different results for the "derived" (or of new evolutionary traits) selenodont Eocene European artiodactyl families, making it uncertain whether they were closer to the Tylopoda or Ruminantia. Possibly, the Xiphodontidae may have arisen from an unknown dichobunoid group, thus making its resemblance to tylopods an instance of convergent evolution.
In an article published in 2019, Romain Weppe et al. conducted a phylogenetic analysis on the Cainotherioidea within the Artiodactyla based on mandibular and dental characteristics, specifically in terms of relationships with artiodactyls of the Palaeogene. The results retrieved that the superfamily was closely related to the Mixtotheriidae and Anoplotheriidae. They determined that the Cainotheriidae, Robiacinidae, Anoplotheriidae, and Mixtotheriidae formed a clade that was the sister group to the Ruminantia while Tylopoda, along with the Amphimerycidae and Xiphodontidae split earlier in the tree (the latter family is represented only by Xiphodon in the cladogram). The phylogenetic tree published in the article and another work about the cainotherioids is outlined below:

In 2022, Weppe created a phylogenetic analysis in his academic thesis regarding Palaeogene artiodactyl lineages, focusing most specifically on the endemic European families. He stated that his phylogeny was the first formal one to propose affinities of the Xiphodontidae and Anoplotheriidae. He found that the Anoplotheriidae, Mixtotheriidae, and Cainotherioidea form a clade based on synapomorphic dental traits (traits thought to have originated from their most recent common ancestor). The result, Weppe mentioned, matches up with previous phylogenetic analyses on the Cainotherioidea with other endemic European Palaeogene artiodactyls that support the families as a clade. As a result, he argued that the proposed superfamily Anoplotherioidea, composing of the Anoplotheriidae and Xiphodontidae as proposed by Alan W. Gentry and Hooker in 1988, is invalid due to the polyphyly of the lineages in the phylogenetic analysis, meaning that the two families were not as closely related as previously thought. However, the Xiphodontidae was still found to compose part of a wider clade with the three other groups. Within the Xiphodontidae, Weppe's phylogeny tree classified Haplomeryx as a sister taxon to the clade consisting of Xiphodon plus Dichodon, making the latter two close relatives.
DescriptionSkull
Compared to Xiphodon, Dichodon has not been as closely discussed by other sources in terms of anatomical features of the skull. Most of what is known about the skull of Dichodon is based on observations written by French palaeontologist Colette Dechaseaux in 1965. Her study and reconstruction of the genus were based on fossils of D. cf. cervinum held by the Natural History Museum of Basel along with a mandible of D. cervinum, previously recorded by the French palaeontologist Charles Depéret in 1917. The skull of Dichodon appears both high and narrow, and the openings of the nasal bones appear reduced. The skull of D. cf. cervinum appears triangular in shape, the back area being particular enlarged and the nasals appearing quadrangular in shape. The external nostrils are widened at their midlength areas, extending from the front area of the premaxilla to the midlength of P2. The alveolar process (or edge with a tooth socket) of the premaxilla is oval-shaped and narrow. While the nasal passages are narrowed, the external nostrils appear more widely open. The nasal bones themselves are narrow plus elongated. The orbit, the eye socket, is positioned frontward.
The maxilla and lacrimal bone are the largest bones present within the side portion of the snout. In its upper half area, the maxilla appears to be strongly hollowed up to the lacrimal bone area. The premaxilla projects forward to the point where the incisors are observable at the skull's sides. The premaxillary-maxillary suture occupies a slight external edge of the nostril. The premaxillary-nasal suture extends forward up to the centre of the second premolar. The maxillary-lacrimal suture appears from the nasal and extends by appearing straight at first then concave. Dichodon has multiple noticeable fossae (hollowings in bones) such as the lacrimal fossa and malar fossa, which are all deep but individualized in form. It is uncertain if the positions of the fossae are due to phylogenetic relations or thinness of the cranial vault and sinuses. The lacrimal fossa on D. cervinum is well-developed and therefore affects the morphologies of the maxilla, nasal bones, and frontal bone. The snout of Dichodon is similar to that of Xiphodon but differs from it by being shorter and narrower. That of Xiphodon in comparison is more rounded and elongated in appearance, the maxillae constituting part of the snout being less extensive in height.
The palatine bones of Dichodon are V-shaped. At both sides of the sagittal axis, the hard palate is almost flat. The incisive foramen is small, extending approximately from the canine to the centre of the first premolar. Between the two incisive foramina of D. cf. cervinum is a rounded ridge that divides into two at the sockets of the third incisors. Both palatine foramen types of Dichodon have similar proportions and positions to the palatine foramen of Xiphodon, but those of Xiphodon are greater in length and have different morphologies to those of Dichodon.
The mandible of Dichodon can resemble that of the anoplotheriid Dacrytherium but differs by the front, or body, portion being rectilinear in shape and the reduction of the convex form within the dental row. Little has been published in regard to the mandible's anatomical traits since Depéret. This is part of the problem behind the relatively incomplete anatomical record of the genus itself, but Dechaseaux determined that the skull of Dichodon would have resembled those of the Palaeogene camelid Poebrotherium and the oromerycid Protylopus.
The known brain endocast (natural brain-shaped cast) of Dichodon is only partial, consisting of a front region with a left olfactory bulb and a back area. The olfactory bulbs are positioned behind the orbit.
Dentition
Both Xiphodon and Dichodon display complete sets of 3 three incisors, 1 canine, 4 premolars, and 3 molars on each half of the upper and lower jaws, consistent with the primitive placental mammal dental formula of 3.1.4.33.1.4.3 for a total of 44 teeth. As members of the Xiphodontidae, they share both small incisors and the absences of distinct diastemata (gaps between teeth). They are also characterized by indistinct canines in comparison to their other teeth and elongated premolars. Xiphodontids additionally have molariform P4 plus P4 teeth, upper molars with 4 to 5 crescent-shaped cusps, and selenodont lower molars with 4 ridges, compressed lingual (mouth's inner area) cuspids, and crescent-shaped labial (outward area) cuspids.
The dentition of Dichodon is brachyodont, or high-crowned, in form. Most of its premolars are significantly elongated, but its P4 teeth are molarized, or more closely resembling molars, while the P4 teeth are three-lobed. The upper molars are tetraselenodont, or four-cusped, and has an overall semi-quadrangular shape; in some species, the molars more compressed at the top sides. The preprotocrista ridges (enamel ridges connecting to the protocone and paracone cusps) of the molars are very short. The four-cusped trait on Dichodon was inherently present in all species including the earliest-appearing D. simplex. The earliest species such as D. simplex and D. ruetimeyeri, however, have upper P4 teeth that are instead of triangular shapes with a singular internal tubercle (crown elevation). Later species such as D. subtilis, D. cuspidatum, D. cervinum and D. frohnstettensis have semi-quadrangular P4 teeth.
All species of Dichodon are defined by elongated premolars, but the degree of such elongations can define individual species. However, the trends of elongated premolars are unclear in relation to proposed phylogenetic relations. For instance, D. subtilis is specialized compared to most other species in its extreme elongation. According to Sudre, the prominence of elongated premolars of D. vidalenci is similar to that of D. subtilis, but it is uncertain whether this is a case of parallel evolution where two independent lineages acquired the same traits (the validity of D. vidalenci remains questioned). The degree of molarization of the fourth premolars is another trait defining different species and potentially lineages. Sudre suggested that the hypothesized lineage of D. ruetimeyeri - D. cartieri had a greater degree of molarization compared to that of another potential lineage consisting of D. simplex - D. lugdunensis.
Postcranial skeleton
Little is definitely known about the postcranial anatomy of Dichodon and most other xiphodonts. Only Xiphodon has adequately documented postcranial fossils that are informative about its overall anatomy. Depéret assigned two ankle bones, an astragalus and a calcaneus, to D. cervinum in 1917. The former has a similar appearance to that of Dacrytherium with a narrow and elongated shape plus a wide plus deep tibial groove. The calcaneus assigned to Dichodon is also similar to that of Dacrytherium, as it appears narrower compared to those of both Xiphodon and ruminants. However, the postcranial fossils were later reassigned to Xiphodon while those originally assigned to the latter were reclassified to Dichodon. The astragalus reassigned to Dichodon was described as being narrow plus elongated in form, its tibial groove appearing narrow but deep. The back calcaneal facet, occupying a significant portion of the astragalus' back face, is wide compared to those of Dacrytherium and Leptotheridium.
Size
The Xiphodontidae is characterized by its species being very small to medium in size. Speciose xiphodonts such as Dichodon and Haplomeryx tended to have displayed evolutionary increases in size. Unlike Xiphodon with a consistent medium size range and Haplomeryx with a very small to small size range, Dichodon included small to medium sized species. The larger-sized species compose of D. cervinum, D. cuspidatum, D. stehlini, and D. biroi while the others, namely D. frohnstettensis, D. simplex, D. subtilis, D. cartieri, D. lugdunensis, and D. ruetimeyeri, are smaller-sized. The M2 of the smaller-sized D. lugdunensis, for instance, measures 7 mm (0.28 in) long and 7.7 mm (0.30 in) wide. In comparison, the dentition of D. stehlini is very large based on M2 measuring 13 mm (0.51 in) long and 14 mm (0.55 in) wide, attesting to the gigantism of it and D. cuspidatum compared to other species. The two very large species were probably offshoots appearing at later points of time that did not last long, as evident by their restricted single localities.
In 2019, Helder Gomes Rodriguez et al. published weight estimates of Palaeogene artiodactyls including Xiphodon, calculated from dental measurements or those of astragali, but not but not the other xiphodont genera Dichodon and Haplomeryx.
Palaeobiology
The Xiphodontidae is a selenodont artiodactyl group in western Europe, meaning that the family was likely adapted for folivorous (leaf-eating) dietary habits. Dechaseaux considered that the two xiphodontids, Xiphodon and Dichodon, may have been more evolutionarily derived compared to North American Palaeogene tylopods. The latter genus had higher-crowned (brachyodont) selenodont dentition compared to the anoplotheriid Dacrytherium. Dichodon has no modern analogues in dentition with respect to extant artiodactyls like ruminants and was likely greatly adapted for folivory. Dichodon and Xiphodon display different morphologies in dentition, implying different ecological specializations. Dichodon had progressively molarized premolars for the function of grinding food while Xiphodon retained the primitive trait of having molars with five cusps and shifted towards specialized bladelike dentition.
Due to the lack of postcranial evidence of other xiphodonts other than Xiphodon, thought to have been adapted towards cursoriality based on similar forelimb morphologies to those of the Palaeogene camelids, it is not possible to prove that the postcranial morphologies of Dichodon and Haplomeryx were similar to those of Xiphodon. Because of the dental and postcranial similarities, Xiphodon and Dichodon could have been European ecological counterparts to camelids.
PalaeoecologyMiddle Eocene
For much of the Eocene, a hothouse climate with humid, tropical environments with consistently high precipitations prevailed. Modern mammalian orders including the Perissodactyla, Artiodactyla, and Primates (or the suborder Euprimates) appeared already by the early Eocene, diversifying rapidly and developing dentitions specialized for folivory. The omnivorous forms mostly either switched to folivorous diets or went extinct by the middle Eocene (47–37 million years ago) along with the archaic "condylarths". By the late Eocene (approx. 37–33 mya), most of the ungulate form dentitions shifted from bunodont (or rounded) cusps to cutting ridges (i.e. lophs) for folivorous diets.
Land connections between western Europe and North America were interrupted around 53 Ma. From the early Eocene up until the Grande Coupure extinction event (56–33.9 mya), western Eurasia was separated into three landmasses: western Europe (an archipelago), Balkanatolia (in-between the Paratethys Sea of the north and the Neotethys Ocean of the south), and eastern Eurasia. The Holarctic mammalian faunas of western Europe were therefore mostly isolated from other landmasses including Greenland, Africa, and eastern Eurasia, allowing for endemism to develop. Therefore, the European mammals of the late Eocene (MP17–MP20 of the Mammal Palaeogene zones) were mostly descendants of endemic middle Eocene groups.
Some of the first undisputed xiphodont species to appear in the fossil record are D. ruetimeyeri of the Egerkingen-Huppersand locality of Switzerland (MP13? or MP14?) and D. cartieri of the Egerkingen α + β locality (MP14). By then, they would have coexisted with perissodactyls (Palaeotheriidae, Lophiodontidae, and Hyrachyidae), non-endemic artiodactyls (Dichobunidae and Tapirulidae), endemic European artiodactyls (Choeropotamidae, Cebochoeridae, and Anoplotheriidae), and primates (Adapidae). The Amphimerycidae made its first appearance by the level MP14. The stratigraphic ranges of the early species of Dichodon also overlapped with metatherians (Herpetotheriidae), cimolestans (Pantolestidae, Paroxyclaenidae), rodents (Ischyromyidae, Theridomyoidea, Gliridae), eulipotyphlans, bats, apatotherians, carnivoraformes (Miacidae), and hyaenodonts (Hyainailourinae, Proviverrinae). Other MP13-MP14 sites have also yielded fossils of turtles and crocodylomorphs, and MP13 sites are stratigraphically the latest to have yielded remains of the bird clades Gastornithidae and Palaeognathae.
In the Egerkingen α + β locality, D. cartieri fossils occur with those of the herpetotheriid Amphiperatherium, ischyromyids Ailuravus and Plesiarctomys, pseudosciurid Treposciurus, omomyid Necrolemur, adapid Leptadapis, proviverrine Proviverra, palaeotheres (Propalaeotherium, Anchilophus, Lophiotherium, Plagiolophus, Palaeotherium), hyrachyid Chasmotherium, lophiodont Lophiodon, dichobunids Hyperdichobune and Mouillacitherium, choeropotamid Rhagatherium, anoplotheriid Catodontherium, amphimerycid Pseudamphimeryx, cebochoerid Cebochoerus, tapirulid Tapirulus, mixtotheriid Mixtotherium, and the xiphodont Haplomeryx. Both D. ruetimeyeri and D. cartieri are known only from their type localities, meaning that they have restricted stratigraphic ranges.
MP16, as evident by the locality of Le Bretou in France, marks the first appearances of D. cervinum and D. frohnstettensis according to recent sources (the latter of which is also recorded at another MP16 locality Lavergne), along with D. vidalenci. Dichodon is recorded in Le Bretou along with the herpetotheriids Amphiperatherium and Peratherium, pseudorhyncocyonid Leptictidium, nyctitheriids Cryptotopos and Saturninia, notharctid Anchomomys, omomyid Necrolemur, rodents (Elfomys, Glamys, Paradelomys, Remys, Sciuroides), bats (Carcinipteryx, Hipposideros, Palaeophyllophora, Vaylatsia), proviverrine Allopterodon, carnivoraformes Quercygale and Paramiacis, palaeotheres (Anchilophus, Plagiolophus, Palaeotherium), lophiodont Lophiodon, cebochoerids Acotherulum and Cebochoerus, anoplotheriids (Catodontherium, Dacrytherium, Robiatherium), dichobunids Dichobune and Mouillacitherium, amphimerycid Pseudamphimeryx, robiacinid Robiacina, tapirulid Tapirulus, and the other xiphodonts Xiphodon and Haplomeryx.
After MP16, faunal turnover occurred, marking the disappearances of the lophiodonts and European hyrachyids as well as the extinctions of all European crocodylomorphs except for the alligatoroid Diplocynodon. The causes of the faunal turnover have been attributed to a shift from humid and highly tropical environments to drier and more temperate forests with open areas and more abrasive vegetation. The surviving herbivorous faunas shifted their dentitions and dietary strategies accordingly to adapt to abrasive and seasonal vegetation. The environments were still subhumid and full of subtropical evergreen forests, however. The Palaeotheriidae was the sole remaining European perissodactyl group, and frugivorous-folivorous or purely folivorous artiodactyls became the dominant group in western Europe.
Late Eocene
The late Eocene records two species of Dichodon that are exclusive to single localities, namely D. cuspidatum at the Hordle Cliff (MP17) and D. stehlini from La Débruge (MP18). On the other hand, D. cervinum and D. frohnstettensis are recorded in multiple British, French, and Swiss localities dating from MP17a to MP20. By that time, the Cainotheriidae and the derived anoplotheriids Anoplotherium and Diplobune both made their first fossil record appearances by MP18. In addition, several migrant mammal groups had reached western Europe by MP17a-MP18, namely the Anthracotheriidae, Hyaenodontinae, and Amphicyonidae. In addition to snakes, frogs, and salamandrids, rich assemblage of lizards are known in western Europe as well from MP16-MP20, representing the Iguanidae, Lacertidae, Gekkonidae, Agamidae, Scincidae, Helodermatidae, and Varanoidea, most of which were able to thrive in the warm temperatures of western Europe.
In the MP19 locality of Escamps, D. frohnstettensis is recorded to have cooccurred with the likes of the herpetotheriids Amphiperatherium and Peratherium, pseudorhyncocyonid Pseudorhyncocyon, nyctitheres Saturninia and Amphidozotherium, bats (Hipposideros, Vaylatsia, Stehlinia), theridomyids (Paradelomys, Elfomys, Blainvillimys, Theridomys), adapid Palaeolemur, hyainailourine Pterodon, amphicyonid Cynodictis, palaeotheres Palaeotherium and Plagiolophus, dichobunid Dichobune, choeropotamid Choeropotamus, anoplotheriids Anoplotherium and Diplobune, cainotheres Oxacron and Paroxacron, amphimerycid Amphimeryx, and the other xiphodonts Xiphodon and Haplomeryx.
Extinction
The Grande Coupure event during the latest Eocene to earliest Oligocene (MP20-MP21) is one of the largest and most abrupt faunal turnovers in the Cenozoic of Western Europe and coincident with climate forcing events of cooler and more seasonal climates. The event led to the extinction of 60% of western European mammalian lineages, which were subsequently replaced by Asian immigrants. The Grande Coupure is often dated directly to the Eocene-Oligocene boundary at 33.9 Ma, although some estimate that the event began slightly later, at 33.6–33.4 mya. The event occurred during or after the Eocene-Oligocene transition, an abrupt shift from a hot greenhouse world that characterised much of the Palaeogene to a coolhouse/icehouse world from the early Oligocene onwards. The massive drop in temperatures results from the first major expansion of the Antarctic ice sheets that caused drastic pCO2 decreases and an estimated drop of ~70 m (230 ft) in sea level.
Many palaeontologists agree that glaciation and the resulting drops in sea level allowed for increased migrations between Balkanatolia and western Europe. The Turgai Strait, which once separated much of Europe from Asia, is often proposed as the main European seaway barrier prior to the Grande Coupure, but some researchers challenged this perception recently, arguing that it completely receded already 37 Ma, long before the Eocene-Oligocene transition. In 2022, Alexis Licht et al. suggested that the Grande Coupure could have possibly been synchronous with the Oi-1 glaciation (33.5 Ma), which records a decline in atmospheric CO2, boosting the Antarctic glaciation that already started by the Eocene-Oligocene transition.
The Grande Coupure event also marked a large faunal turnover marking the arrivals of later anthracotheres, entelodonts, ruminants (Gelocidae, Lophiomerycidae), rhinocerotoids (Rhinocerotidae, Amynodontidae, Eggysodontidae), carnivorans (later Amphicyonidae, Amphicynodontidae, Nimravidae, and Ursidae),  eastern Eurasian rodents (Eomyidae, Cricetidae, and Castoridae), and eulipotyphlans (Erinaceidae).
All three xiphodont genera are last recorded in MP20 localities. The disappearances of the three genera meant the complete extinction of the Xiphodontidae. Many other artiodactyl genera from western Europe disappeared also as a result of the Grande Coupure extinction event. The extinctions of Dichodon and many other mammals have been attributed to negative interactions with immigrant faunas (competition, predations), environmental changes from cooling climates, or some combination of the two.


The mammals of Australia have a rich fossil history, as well as a variety of extant mammalian species, dominated by the marsupials, but also including monotremes and placentals. Of the three mammal subclasses, monotremes, marsupials, and placentals, Australia is one of the only countries home to all three. The marsupials evolved to fill specific ecological niches, and in many cases they are physically similar to the placental mammals in Eurasia and North America that occupy similar niches, a phenomenon known as convergent evolution.  For example, the top mammalian predators in Australia, the Tasmanian tiger and the marsupial lion, bore a striking resemblance to large canids such as the gray wolf and large cats respectively; gliding possums and flying squirrels have similar adaptations enabling their arboreal lifestyle; and the numbat and anteaters are both digging insectivores. Most of Australia's mammals are herbivores or omnivores.
Evolutionary history
The fossil record shows that monotremes have been present in Australia since the Early Cretaceous 145 to 99 million years ago (mya). Studies on their ancestral amniote features and genome show that the monotremes diverged from different mammal groups around the Triassic-Jurassic period, 200 million years ago.
Marsupials probably existed in Australia at least from the early Paleocene (64 to 65 mya), although the earliest unequivocal fossils of Australian marsupials are from the late Oligocene – 25 mya.
Indisputable remains of Australian placental mammals start from the Miocene, when Australia moved closer to Indonesia. After 15 mya bats appear reliably in the fossil record, with rodents appearing after 5 to 10 mya. The subsequent introductions of placental mammals into Australian fauna occurred about 1 mya (rats), 40,000 years ago (homo sapiens), several thousand years ago (dingoes, introduced by humans), and 200 years ago from European colonization (many species).
Some claims have been made about placental mammal fossils from the Eocene, called Tingamarra. These claims are based on fossils from the Murgon fossil site: the first find was a single tooth, which has some characteristic features of condylarthra, and later an ankle bone and an ear bone. Both the age and placental nature of these fossils have been challenged by other researchers.
Monotremes and marsupials
Monotremes are mammals with a unique method of reproduction: they lay eggs instead of giving birth to live young. Two of the five known living species of monotreme occur in Australia: the platypus and the short-beaked echidna. The platypus — a venomous, egg-laying, duck-billed, amphibious mammal — is one of the strangest creatures in the animal kingdom. When a platypus pelt was first presented by Joseph Banks to English naturalists in the late 18th century, they were convinced it must be a cleverly created hoax.  Another strange monotreme is the short-beaked echidna; covered in hairy spikes, with a tubular snout in the place of a mouth, it has a tongue that can move in and out of the snout about 100 times per minute to capture termites.

Australia is also home to the world's largest and most diverse selection of marsupials: mammals with a pouch in which they rear their young. The marsupial carnivores — order Dasyuromorphia — are represented by two surviving families: the Dasyuridae with 51 members, and the Myrmecobiidae with the numbat as its sole surviving member.
The thylacine, or Tasmanian tiger, was the largest Dasyuromorphia and the last living specimen of the family Thylacinidae; however, the last known specimen died in captivity in 1936. The world's largest surviving carnivorous marsupial is the Tasmanian devil; it is the size of a small dog and hunts although it is opportunistic. It became extinct on the mainland some 600 years ago and is now found only in Tasmania. There are four species of quoll, or native cats, all of which are threatened species. The remainder of the Dasyuridae are referred to as "marsupial mice"; most weigh less than 100 grams (3+1⁄2 oz). There are two species of marsupial mole — order Notoryctemorphia — that inhabit the deserts of Western Australia. These rare, blind, earless carnivores spend most of their time underground; little is known about them.
The marsupial omnivores include the bandicoots and bilbies, order Peramelemorphia. There are seven species in Australia, most of which are endangered. These small creatures share several characteristic physical features: a plump, arch-backed body with a long, delicately tapering snout, large upright ears, long thin legs, and a thin tail. The evolutionary origin of this group is unclear, but they share characteristics from both carnivorous and herbivorous marsupials.

The marsupial herbivores are classified in the order Diprotodontia, and further into the suborders Vombatiformes, Phalangeriformes and Macropodiformes. The Vombatiformes include the koala and the three species of wombat. One of Australia's best-known marsupials, the koala is an arboreal (tree-dwelling) species that feeds on the leaves of some 120 species of eucalyptus. Wombats, on the other hand, live on the ground and feed on grasses, sedges and roots. Wombats use their rodent-like front teeth and powerful claws to dig extensive burrow systems; they are mainly crepuscular and nocturnal. Wombats are also well known for their backwards facing pouches. Also among this group is the marsupial lion, which went extinct after the arrival of aboriginals, and was one of the few carnivorous vombatiforms.
The Phalangeriformes includes possums and is a diverse group of arboreal marsupials, including six families and 26 species. They vary in size from the pygmy possum, weighing just 7 grams (1⁄4 oz), to the cat-sized common ringtail and brushtail possums. The sugar and squirrel gliders are common species of gliding possum, found in the eucalyptus forests of eastern Australia, while the feathertail glider is the smallest glider species. The gliding possums have membranes, called "patagia", that extend from the fifth finger of their forelimb back to the first toe of their hind foot. These membranes, when outstretched, allow them to glide between trees.
The Macropodiformes are divided into three families that are found in all Australian environments except alpine areas: the Hypsiprymnodontidae, with the musky rat-kangaroo as its only member; the Potoroidae, with 10 species; and the Macropodidae which had 53 members in Australia, but some species are extinct. The Potoroidae include the bettongs, potaroos and rat-kangaroos, small species that make nests and carry plant material with their tails. The Macropodidae include kangaroos, wallabies and associated species; size varies widely within this family. Most macropods move in a bipedal, energy-efficient hopping motion.  They have powerfully muscled tails and large hind legs with long narrow hind feet. The hind feet have a distinctive arrangement of four toes, while the short front legs have five separate digits. The musky rat-kangaroo is the smallest macropod and the only species that is not bipedal, while the male red kangaroo is the largest, reaching a height of about 2 metres (6 ft 7 in) and weighing up to 85 kilograms (187 lb).
Placental mammals
Australia has indigenous placental mammals from two orders: the bats, order Chiroptera,  represented by six families, and the mice and rats, order Rodentia, family Muridae. Bats and rodents are relatively recent arrivals to Australia. Bats probably arrived from Asia, and they are present in the fossil record only from as recently as 15 mya. Although 7% of the world's bats species live in Australia, there are only two endemic genera of bats. Rodents first arrived in Australia 5 to 10 mya and underwent a wide radiation to produce the species collectively known as the "old endemics". The old endemics are represented by 14 extant genera. About a million years ago, the rat entered Australia from New Guinea and evolved into seven species of Rattus, collectively called the "new endemics".
Since human settlement, many placental mammals have been introduced to Australia and are now feral. The first was the dingo; fossil evidence suggests that people from the north brought the dingo to Australia about 5,000 years ago. When Europeans settled Australia they intentionally released many species into the wild, including the red fox, brown hare, and the European rabbit. Other domestic species have escaped and over time have produced wild populations, including the cat, fallow deer, rusa deer, chital, sambar, domestic horse, donkey, pig, domestic goat, water buffalo, and dromedary. Only three species of Australia's non-indigenous placental mammals were not deliberately introduced: the house mouse, black rat and brown rat.

Forty-six species of marine mammals from the infraorder Cetacea are found in Australian coastal waters, but since many of these species have a global distribution, some authors do not consider them Australian species. There are nine species of baleen whale, including the enormous humpback whales and southern right whales. Dwarf minke whales are common off Great Barrier Reef in winter. There are 37 species of toothed whale, which include all six genera of the family Ziphiidae (beaked whales), and 21 species of oceanic dolphin, including the Australian snubfin dolphin, a species first described in 2005 that is endemic to Australia. Some oceanic dolphins, such as the orca, can be found in all waters around the continent; others, such as the Irrawaddy dolphin, are confined to the warm northern waters. The dugong (order Sirenia) is an endangered marine species that inhabits the waters of northeastern and northwestern Australia, particularly the Torres Strait. It can grow up to 3 metres (9.8 ft) long and weigh as much as 400 kilograms (880 lb). The dugong is the only herbivorous marine mammal in Australia, feeding on sea grass in coastal areas.
Ten species of seals and sea lions (parvorder Pinnipedia) live off the southern Australian coast and in Sub-Antarctic Australian territories.
Conserving Australian Mammals
The distinctive nature of Australia's mammalian fauna, with a high rate of endemism, underscores the global significance of these conservation efforts. Key strategies include the creation of Safe Havens or predator-free areas providing a refuge from predators such as cats and foxes, which are responsible for the decline of many native species. Habitat Protection and Restoration. Conservation efforts focus on managing national parks, reserves, and private conservation areas to support the natural ecosystems required by various species. This includes activities like reforestation, erosion control, and management of fire regimes to ensure habitats remain suitable for their mammalian inhabitants. Captive breeding, translocation, and reintroduction aimed to bolster wild populations and are often supported by extensive research into the biology and ecology of the species to optimize their chances of survival.
Given the dynamic nature of ecosystems and the ongoing challenges such as climate change, conservation strategies must be adaptable. This involves regularly assessing the effectiveness of conservation actions and being willing to modify approaches based on new scientific findings and changing environmental conditions.
Field Guides and books
Leonard Cronin with Marion Westmacot (illustrations), Key Guide to Australian Mammals, Reed Books, Sydney, 1991, 190 pages, ISBN 978-0-7301-0355-4.
Pat Slater (text), and Steve Parish, Jiri Lochman, Michael Morcombe, Stanley Breeden, Ian Morris (photography), First Field Guide to Australian Mammals, Search and Learn, Steve Parish Publishing, Fortitude Valley, 1997, 56 pages. ISBN 978-1-875932-53-5.
Ronald Strahan and Steve Van Dyck, The Mammals of Australia, Reed New Holland, Sydney, Third Edition, 2008, 887 pages. ISBN 978-1-877069-25-3. See also the last Strahan's Mammals of Australia edited by Andrew M. Baker and Ian C. Gynther, New Holland Publishers, Fourth edition, 2023, 883 pages. ISBN 1925546750 {{isbn}}: Check isbn value: checksum (help).


The Marine Mammal Center (TMMC) is a private, non-profit U.S. organization that was established in 1975 for the purpose of rescuing, rehabilitating and releasing marine mammals who are injured, sick or abandoned. It was founded in Sausalito, California, by Lloyd Smalley, Pat Arrigoni and Paul Maxwell. Since 1975, TMMC has rescued over 28,000 marine mammals. It also serves as a center for environmental research and education regarding marine mammals, namely cetaceans (whales, dolphins and porpoises), pinnipeds (seals, fur seals, walruses and sea lions), otters and sirenians (manatees and dugongs). Marine mammal abandonment refers to maternal separation; pups that have been separated from their mother before weaning. At the center, they receive specialized veterinary care: they are diagnosed, treated, rehabilitated and ideally, released back into the wild. Animals in need of assistance are usually identified by a member of the public who has contacted the center. These animals represent the following major species: California sea lions, northern elephant seals, Pacific harbor seals, northern fur seals, Guadalupe fur seals, Hawaiian monk seals, and southern sea otters. On a few occasions, TMMC has taken in Steller sea lions and bottlenose/Pacific white-sided dolphins. The only non-mammals that TMMC takes in are sea turtles.
Research
The research team consists of veterinarians and biologists who conduct not only medical diagnosis and intervention, but also publish scientific reports on marine animal health in relation to the Pacific Ocean’s environmental chemistry. They collaborate with other institutions to provide vital information on disease, immunological systems and environmental effects. Some patients are fitted with radio or satellite tags before release, to further specific research goals. The center collaborates with counterparts around the world (most notably from England, Canada, Mexico, Brazil, Australia, Scotland, the Netherlands, France and Germany) in working on complex cases, and also researches the interactions of ocean-dwelling mammals with the marine environment in collaboration with other institutions.
Researchers at TMMC have discovered that domoic acid (DA) is the causative agent responsible for illness in a great many California sea lions. DA is naturally produced by the diatom Pseudo-nitzschia. DA passes up the food chain as the diatoms are consumed by zooplankton. These zooplankton are then consumed by fish, where the toxin accumulates. Fish are unharmed by it, but mammals are. California sea lions are disproportionately affected because they feed closer to shore, where more of these diatoms are present. When consumed by marine mammals, DA activates neural pathways in the brain, specifically, the hippocampus. This neural activation is unregulated and results in seizures. Repeated exposure will cause repeated activation, ultimately burning out these neural pathways and causing permanent brain damage — specifically, atrophy of the hippocampus. Domoic acid is the same biotoxin that causes amnesic shellfish poisoning in humans.
Another discovery by TMMC, in collaboration with the University of Florida, is that seal pox is distinct from pox viruses isolated from other species. It is unrelated to chicken pox or smallpox. Also being investigated is the increased incidence of leptospirosis, a bacterial pathogen that can acutely damage the kidneys of marine mammals.
The Marine Mammal Center has made advances in the use of general anesthesia on marine mammals, used during surgical procedures. To a certain extent, marine mammals are voluntary breathers. Pinnipeds (seals, sea lions and fur seals) can reduce their respiratory rate in order to conserve oxygen and remain underwater for extended periods. This makes the use of general anesthesia and tranquilizing darts more problematic.
Any animal that dies in treatment, or is euthanized while at the center, will undergo a necropsy to further research. At the center, there is a viewing area where the public can observe the procedure. Animals are only euthanized if their illness or injury is beyond treatment and would lead to the animal's death, or unabated suffering. Considering that animals in need are only identified when their distress is significant enough to be observable by the public, it is not unusual for some of these animals to be beyond rehabilitation.
Education
The education outreach program reaches in excess of 100,000 school children and adults each year, emphasizing the human connection to the marine environment. In addition to the groups of children who visit the center, there formerly was a program called 'Sea to School' that visits Bay Area Schools. The hope is that with a better understanding of the ocean and its inhabitants, communities will care for and respect the oceans.
Rescue and rehabilitation
The ultimate goal is for every animal rescued by TMMC to be released back to the ocean with a second chance at life. Since 1975, the center has rescued over 24,000 marine mammals, mostly California sea lions, northern elephant seals and Pacific harbor seals. The center can have upwards of 275 animals at the hospital at one time. In the spring time, the center rescues mostly young elephant seals and harbor seal pups that have been separated from their mothers due to either big storms or human interaction, or once weaned from their mother, were unable to find food on their own. In the summer time, the center rescues mostly California sea lions that are approximately 1 year old and have struggled to find food on their own, or adults suffering from different diseases, such as domoic acid toxicosis, leptospirosis or cancer. The center also rescues approximately 80–100 animals each year due to negative human interaction, such as entanglement in plastic or fishing gear, ingestion of trash, harassment on the beach and even gunshot wounds. At the center, volunteers and veterinarians provide round-the-clock care for the patients to help them recover, ranging from administering medication and food to patients, teaching young seals to catch and eat fish, and performing medical procedures like x-rays, surgeries and ultrasounds.
In almost all cases, the animals can be treated and returned to their ocean home. In rare cases, less than 1% of the time, animals that are rescued may be deemed unreleasable. If an animal has been released on two occasions and returns both times, it may have become habituated with people and is no longer capable of fending for itself. Some animals may have suffered injuries that have left them blind or otherwise disabled. Although their health is stable, they may no longer be able to survive independently in the wild. These too, are considered unreleasable. In these circumstances, TMMC works with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) to find a permanent home for the animal in an approved zoo or aquarium. In May, 2011, the San Francisco Zoo accepted two such animals.  Both are male California sea lions, named Silent Knight and Henry. Silent Knight was shot and blinded in Sausalito in December 2010. The cause of Henry's blindness is unknown. There was no external injury to the eyes and the cause may be neurological.
Facilities, budget and governance
Facilities include the Marin Headlands headquarters and field stations in San Luis Obispo, Monterey, Anchor Bay and Fort Bragg. The center's animal rescue radius is along the Pacific Coast of California and comprises approximately 600 square miles, between San Luis Obispo and Mendocino.
The Marine Mammal Center facility is located at what was once part of a former Nike Missile site. From 1953 to 1979, the United States Army built and operated over 265 Nike missile batteries throughout the United States. The best preserved installation is in the Marin Headlands, known as SF88. It was intended to protect local civilian and military populations against attack by Soviet bomber aircraft. It was opened in 1954, equipped with Nike Ajax missiles and later converted to hold improved Nike Hercules missiles. The site was decommissioned in 1974. Portions of the site, including three Nike Hercules missiles, can be visited through the Golden Gate National Park Service on limited days and hours.
TMMC opened in 1975, one year after the closure of the missile site. Underground silos now house the facility's water filtration system. A small structure nearby was once a guard house. The exterior remains unchanged, but it is now part of the Harbor Seal Hospital and also holds a surgical suite. Neither the former silo, nor the former guard house are open to the public.
The Marine Mammal Center is entirely privately funded. In 2012, the yearly operating budget for the center was approximately $7,500,000. 81% of expenditures went directly to animal care, veterinary expenses, and educational programs. In 2012, 76% of TMMC's operating budget came from private donations and individual and family memberships.  The center presently has a paid staff of 45 individuals. Its operation is reliant on several hundred volunteers who are trained in rescue, release, animal care and education.
The main facility in Sausalito can accommodate approximately 1,200 animals a year, although a typical year brings in between 600 and 800 patients. In 2009, a lack of available fish related to the El Nino weather pattern brought 1,750 patients to TMMC, more than in any other year since it opened. 2012 marked the year with the highest percentage of survivability for all patients to date. In the spring of 2013, environmental conditions limited to Southern California resulted in a higher than normal number of sea lion strandings. During this period, TMMC has taken in the overflow, approximately 65 patients.
Growth
The Marine Mammal Center began in 1975 with bath tubs and small pools surrounded by a fence. In June 2009, a multi-facility complex was opened to hold both the animals and the staff. It was built with recycled materials and utilizes sound boards made of sea weed. Donated solar panels provide approximately 20% of the facility's energy. Water, which was previously a major expense, is now filtered through an advanced sand bed and ozone system which allows a water recovery rate of 80%.
During the reconstruction, numerous outdoor pens with pools and haul-out surfaces were created. There are also special purpose facilities, including a veterinary hospital, records room, food preparation and storage rooms and rescue equipment storage area. The hospital includes an operating room, treatment areas, an office and pharmaceutical storage. Some of the hospital functions include thoracic surgery, gastrointestinal surgery and orthopedic surgery,  as well as routine examinations and blood sampling for patient diagnosis.
Notable actions
Some specific examples among the thousands of successful outcomes are:
Net entangled humpback whale. In December 2005, a large female humpback whale was rescued off of the Farallon Islands, after she became entangled in crab pot lines during her migration, most likely to wintering grounds near Mexico. The daring maneuver was carried out by center staff and volunteers, along with professional divers, and was the center's first successful open ocean rescue of a whale entangled in netting.
Orphaned Steller sea lion pup at Año Nuevo Island. In 1999, a malnourished 37 lb. (17 kg) pup was found stranded alone at a location known as a northern elephant seal rookery, but not as a birthing location for Steller sea lions. The pup, named Artemis, was restored to health and returned to the wild.  In July 2005, she was again spotted on Año Nuevo Island, but this time she was giving birth to a new pup. This was a particularly unusual outcome, since no pup is known to have been born on that island for at least twenty years.
Humphrey the Whale is arguably the most widely publicized humpback whale in history, having errantly entered San Francisco Bay twice, departing from his Mexico to Alaska migration. Each excursion resulted in dramatic estuarine rescues in 1985 and 1990 by the center, assisted by the United States Coast Guard and hundreds of volunteers. The first rescue was actually to turn Humphrey around in the Sacramento River, while the second was to move him back into the water from the mudflats north of Sierra Point below the Dakin Building.
Baker D., a bottlenose dolphin was successfully rehabilitated and released to join a dolphin pod in Monterey Bay in November 2004.
Sergeant Nevis. On December 5, 2009, a 650 lb. adult, male California sea lion was rescued from Knight's Landing in Yolo County, Northern California. Sgt. Nevis had suffered a shotgun wound to his sinuses. He was named after Yolo County police officer Michael Nevis, who assisted with his rescue. Imaging tests revealed that this had not been Sgt. Nevis' first run-in with a shotgun. Buckshot pellets .in his head evidenced that he had been shot several times previously. After months of treatment and rehabilitation, it was determined that he could not survive if returned to the ocean. In association with NOAA, he was transferred to permanent residence at Six Flags Discovery Kingdom in Vallejo, California.
The U.S. Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972, and later amendments, make it a federal crime to hunt, kill, capture and/or harass any marine mammal. State laws and local ordinances may provide additional restrictions and penalties.
On October 8, 2010, Sgt. Nevis had major reconstructive surgery to close the opening in his face created by the entry and exit of the shotgun slug. The complicated surgery was needed to cover the crater-like wound under his eyes. The injury had forced Sgt. Nevis to modify his breathing. He was unable to dive or even submerge his head under water. There was also a continuing risk of infection. Facial reconstruction surgeon Dr. Praful Ramenini donated his services for this delicate surgery. Ramenini was supported by center veterinarians Dr. Bill Van Bonn and Dr. Vanessa Fravel, as well as veterinarians Dr. Diana Procter and Dr. Nancy Anderson from Six Flags Discovery Kingdom.
On October 15, 2010, the Sutter County District Attorney's Office announced the successful criminal prosecution of a fisherman for the shooting of Sgt. Nevis. He was convicted of intentionally maiming or wounding a living animal, in violation of California Penal Code Section 597. He was sentenced to 30 days in jail, five years of probation and ordered to pay restitution of $51,081.48 to TMMC, toward the expenses of treating Sgt. Nevis.
Movie Trivia. In Peter Jackson's Lord of the Rings trilogy, elephant seal and sea lion vocalizations were recorded at TMMC and used as the main component for the sound of the Orcs (northern elephant seals) and the Uruks (California sea lions). Sound Designer David Farmer had, coincidentally, visited the center during elephant seal pupping season and was suitably impressed.


The mammal species of Borneo include 288 species of terrestrial and 91 species of marine mammals recorded within the territorial boundaries of Brunei, Indonesia and Malaysia. The terrestrial mammals are dominated by the chiroptera (102 species of bats) and rodents (61 species of rats and mice).
Introduction
The high diversity and endemicity of mammals is related to the many niches found in the tropical rain forest of Borneo and past Pleistocene events within the Sundaland region. During interglacial and post-glacial periods, there was migration of animal from the Asian mainland into Borneo and into Sulawesi via the Philippines. Due to lack of favourable habitats and small founder population, some species of animals have become extinct and others have radiated into endemic species. Of the 57 mammal species that were identified from archaeological remains in the Niah Caves, Sarawak, 13 were bats. Four of these were megachiropterans, Pteropus vampyrus, Rousettus amplexicaudatus, Rousettus sp and Eonycteris spelaea, all of which remain extant species in Borneo and Peninsular Malaysia.
The provisional list of mammals of Borneo (sensu Lord Medway, Payne et al., Corbet and Hill, Koopman, and Wilson and Reeder) are listed below. There are various conflicts in the taxonomic lists by previous authors, which need further field research for validation.
Taxonomic list
The following list gives the scientific name followed by the common names, description, ecology, conservation and distribution information.
Order: Erinaceomorpha
Echinosorex gymnura, moonrat. Thailand, Malay Peninsula, Sabah, Sarawak, Brunei and Kalimantan.
Hylomys dorsalis, Bornean short-tailed gymnure. Restricted to Bornean mountains.
Order: Soricomorpha
Suncus murinus, house shrew. Africa, Asia, Thailand, Malay Peninsula, Sabah, Sarawak, Brunei and Kalimantan.
Suncus ater, black shrew. Endemic to Borneo; known only from Gunung Kinabalu
Suncus etruscus, Savi's pigmy shrew. Europe, Africa, Asia; Thailand, Malay Peninsula, Sabah and Sarawak.
Crocidura monticola, Sunda shrew. Java, Lombok, Sumba and Flores; Malay Peninsula, Sabah, Sarawak, Brunei and Kalimantan.
Crocidura fuliginosa, south-east Asia white-toothed shrew. India, Indochina, Thailand, Malay Peninsula, Sabah, Sarawak, Brunei and Kalimantan.
Chimarrogale himalayica, Himalayan water shrew. Himalaya, south China, Southeast Asia, Japan, Sumatra and Sabah.
Order: Scandentia
Ptilocercus lowii, pentail treeshrew.
Tupaia glis, common treeshrew.
Tupaia splendidula, ruddy treeshrew.
Tupaia montana, mountain tree shrew.
Tupaia minor, lesser treeshrew.
Tupaia gracilis, slender treeshrew.
Tupaia picta, painted treeshrew.
Tupaia dorsalis, striped treeshrew.
Tupaia tana, large treeshrew.
Dendrogale melanura, smooth-tailed treeshrew.
Order: Dermoptera
Galeopterus variegatus, Sunda flying lemur
Order: Chiroptera
Rousettus amplexicaudatus, Geoffroy's rousette
Rousettus spinalatus, bare-backed rousette
Pteropus vampyrus, large flying fox
Pteropus hypomelanus, island flying fox

Cynopterus brachyotis, lesser short-nosed fruit bat
Cynopterus sphinx, greater short-nosed fruit bat
Cynopterus horsfieldi, Horsfield's fruit bat
Penthetor lucasi, dusky fruit bat
Megaerops ecaudatus, tailless fruit bat
Megaerops wetmorei, white-collared fruit bat
Dyacopterus spadiceus, Dayak fruit bat
Chironax melanocephalus, black-capped fruit bat
Balionycteris maculata, spotted-winged fruit bat
Aethalops aequalis, grey fruit bat
Eonycteris spelaea, cave nectar bat
Eonycteris major, greater nectar bat
Macroglossus minimus, long-tongued nectar bat
Emballonura alecto, greater sheath-tailed bat
Emballonura monticola, lesser sheath-tailed bat
Saccolaimus saccolaimus, pouched tomb bat
Taphozous melanopogon, black-bearded tomb bat
Taphozous longimanus, long-winged tomb bat
Megaderma spasma, lesser false vampire
Nycteris tragata, hollow-faced bat
Rhinolophus borneensis, Bornean horseshoe bat
Rhinolophus pusillus, least horseshoe
Rhinolophus arcuatus, arcuatus horseshoe bat

Rhinolophus acuminatus, acuminate horseshoe bat
Rhinolophus affinis, intermediate horseshoe bat
Rhinolophus creaghi, Creagh's horseshoe bat
Rhinolophus philippinensis, Philippine horseshoe bat
Rhinolophus trifoliatus, trefoil horseshoe bat
Rhinolophus sedulus, lesser woolly horseshoe bat
Hipposideros ater, dusky roundleaf bat
Hipposideros bicolor, bicolor roundleaf bat
Hipposideros cineraceus, ashy roundleaf bat
Hipposideros dyacorum, Dayak roundleaf bat
Hipposideros doriae, least roundleaf

Hipposideros ridleyi, Ridley's roundleaf bat
Hipposideros cervinus, fawn roundleaf bat
Hipposideros galeritus, Cantor's roundleaf bat
Hipposideros coxi, Cox's roundleaf bat
Hipposideros larvatus, intermediate roundleaf bat
Hipposideros diadema, diadem roundleaf bat
Coelops robinsoni, lesser tailless roundleaf bat
Myotis muricola, whiskered myotis
Myotis ater, black myotis
Myotis montivagus, large brown myotis
Myotis siligorensis, small-toothed myotis
Myotis ridleyi, Ridley's myotis
Myotis horsfieldii, Horsfield's myotis
Myotis hasseltii, Hasselt's large-footed myotis
Myotis adversus, grey large-footed myotis
Myotis macrotarsus, pallid large-footed myotis
Pipistrellus javanicus, Javan pistrelle
Pipistrellus tenuis, least pipistrelle
Pipistrellus ceylonicus, dark brown pipistrelle
Hypsugo kitcheneri, red-brown pipistrelle
Falsistrellus petersi, wooly pipistrelle
Arielulus cuprosus, coppery pipistrelle
Hypsugo imbricatus, brown pipistrelle
Hypsugo macrotis, big-eared pipistrelle
Pipistrellus vordermanni, white-winged pipistrelle
Glischropus tylopus, thick-thumb pipistrelle
Philetor brachypterus, narrow-winged brown bat
Hesperoptenus doriae, false serotine
Hesperoptenus blanfordi, least false serotine
Hesperoptenus tomesi, Tomes' false serotine
Tylonycteris robustula, greater bamboo bat
Tylonycteris pachypus, lesser bamboo bat
Scotophilus kuhlii, yellow house bat
Murina cyclotis, orange tube-nosed bat
Murina aenea, bronzed tube-nosed bat
Murina rozendaali, gilded tube-nosed bat
Murina suilla, lesser tube-nosed bat
Harpiocephalus harpia, hairy-winged bat
Kerivoula papillosa, papillose woolly bat
Kerivoula hardwickii, Hardwicke's woolly bat
Kerivoula pellucida, clear-winged woolly bat
Kerivoula intermedia, small woolly bat
Kerivoula minuta, least woolly bat
Kerivoula whiteheadi, Whitehead's woolly bat
Kerivoula lenis, lenis woolly bat
Phoniscus jagorii, frosted groove-toothed bat
Phoniscus atrox, gilded groove-thoothed bat
Miniopterus magnater, large bent-winged bat
Miniopterus schreibersi, common bent-winged bat
Miniopterus pusillus, small bent-winged bat
Miniopterus medius, medium bent-winged bat
Miniopterus australis, lesser bent-winged bat
Cheiromeles torquatus, naked bat
Mops mops, free-tailed bat
Chaerephon plicata, wrinkle-lipped bat
Order: Primates
Nycticebus coucang, Sunda slow loris
Tarsius bancanus, Horsfield's tarsier
Presbytis hosei, Hose's langur
Presbytis rubicunda, maroon langur
Presbytis chrysomelas, Sarawak surili
Presbytis frontata, white-fronted langur
Trachypithecus cristatus, silvered langur
Nasalis larvatus, proboscis monkey
Macaca fascicularis, long-tailed macaque
Macaca nemestrina, pig-tailed macaque
Hylobates muelleri, Müller's Bornean gibbon
Hylobates albibarbis, Bornean white-bearded gibbon
Pongo pygmaeus, Bornean orangutan
Order: Pholidota
Manis javanica, pangolin
Order: Rodentia
Ratufa affinis, giant squirrel
Callosciurus prevostii, Prevost's squirrel
Callosciurus baluensis, Kinabalu squirrel
Callosciurus notatus, plantain squirrel
Callosciurus adamsi, ear-spot squirrel
Callosciurus orestes, Bornean black-banded squirrel
Sundasciurus hippurus, horse-tailed squirrel
Sundasciurus lowii, Low's squirrel
Sundasciurus tenuis, slender squirrel
Sundasciurus jentinki, Jentink's squirrel
Sundasciurus brookei, Brooke's squirrel
Glyphotes simus, red-bellied sculptor squirrel
Lariscus insignis, three-striped ground squirrel
Lariscus hosei, four-striped ground squirrel
Dremomys everetti, Bornean mountain ground squirrel
Rhinosciurus laticaudatus, shrew-faced ground squirrel
Nannosciurus melanotis, black-eared pigmy squirrel
Exilisciurus exilis, plain pigmy squirrel
Exilisciurus whiteheadi, Whitehead's pigmy squirrel
Rheithrosciurus macrotis, tufted ground squirrel
Petaurillus hosei, Hose's pigmy flying squirrel
Petaurillus emiliae, lesser pigmy flying squirrel
Iomys horsfieldii, Horsfield's flying squirrel
Aeromys tephromelas, black flying squirrel
Aeromys thomasi, Thomas's flying squirrel
Petinomys hageni, Hagen's flying squirrel
Petinomys genibarbis, whiskered flying squirrel
Petinomys setosus, Temminck's flying squirrel
Petinomys vordermanni, Vordermann's flying squirrel
Hylopetes lepidus, grey-cheeked flying squirrel
Hylopetes spadiceus, red-cheeked flying squirrel
Pteromyscus pulverulentus, smoky flying squirrel
Petaurista petaurista, red giant flying squirrel
Petaurista elegans, spotted giant flying squirrel
Rattus rattus, house rat
Rattus tiomanicus, Malaysian field rat
Rattus argentiventer, ricefield rat
Rattus baluensis, summit rat
Rattus exulans, Polynesia rat
Rattus norvegicus, Norway rat
Sundamys muelleri, Muller's rat
Sundamys infraluteus, mountain giant rat

Niviventer cremoriventer, dark-tailed rat
Niviventer rapit, long-tailed mountain rat
Maxomys rajah, brown spiny rat

Maxomys surifer, red spiny rat
Maxomys alticola, mountain spiny rat
Maxomys ochraceiventer, chestnut-bellied spiny rat
Maxomys baeodon, small spiny rat
Maxomys whiteheadi, Whitehead's rat
Leopoldamys sabanus, long-tailed giant rat
Lenothrix canus, grey tree rat
Mus musculus castaneus, Asian house rat
Mus caroli, ricefield mouse
Chiropodomys gliroides, common pencil-tailed tree-mouse
Chiropodomys major, large pencil-tailed tree-mouse
Chiropodomys muroides, grey-bellied pencil-tailed tree-mouse
Haeromys margarettae, ranee mouse
Trichys fasciculata, long-tailed porcupine
Hystrix brachyura, common porcupine
Hystrix crassispinis, thick-spined porcupine
Order: Cetacea
Balaenoptera musculus, blue whale
Balaenoptera physalus, fin whale
Balaenoptera borealis, sei whale
Balaenoptera edeni, Bryde's whale
Balaenoptera acutorostrata, minke whale
Megaptera novaeangliae, humpback whale
Physeter macrocephalus, sperm whale
Kogia breviceps, pigmy sperm whale
Kogia simus, dwarf sperm whale
Ziphius cavirostris, Cuvier's beak whale
Mesoplodon sp., beaked whale
Orcaella brevirostris, Irrawaddy dolphin
Peponocephala electra, melon-headed whale
Feresa attenuata, pigmy killer whale
Pseudorca crassidens, false killer whale
Orcinus orca, killer whale
Globicephala macrorhynchus, short-finned pilot whale
Steno bredanensis, rough-toothed dolphin
Sousa chinensis, Indo-Pacific hump-backed dolphin
Lagenodelphis hosei, Fraser's dolphin
Delphinus delphis, common dolphin
Tursiops truncatus, bottlenose dolphin
Grampus griseus, Risso's dolphin
Stenella attenuata, spotted dolphin
Stenella coeruleoalba, striped dolphin
Stenella longirostris, long-snouted spinner dolphin
Neophocaena phocaenoides, finless porpoise
Order: Carnivora
Bay cat, Catopuma badia EN
Sunda clouded leopard, Neofelis diardi VU
Marbled cat, Pardofelis marmorata NT
Flat-headed cat, Prionailurus planiceps EN
Sunda leopard cat, Prionailurus javanensis
Helarctos malayanus, sun bear
Martes flavigula, yellow-throated marten
Mustela nudipes, Malay weasel
Melogale everetti, Bornean ferret-badger
Mydaus javanensis, Malay badger
Lutra sumatrana, hairy-nosed otter
Lutra lutra, Eurasian otter
Lutrogale perspicillata, smooth-coated otter
Aonyx cinereus, oriental small-clawed otter
Viverra tangalunga, Malay civet
Prionodon linsang, banded linsang
Paradoxurus hermaphroditus, common palm civet
Paguma larvata, masked palm civet
Arctictis binturong, bearcat
Arctogalidia trivirgata, small-toothed palm civet
Hemigalus derbyanus, banded palm civet
Diplogale hosei, Hose's civet
Cynogale bennettii, otter-civet
Herpestes brachyurus, short-tailed mongoose
Herpestes semitorquatus, collared mongoose
Order: Sirenia
Dugong dugon, dugong
Order: Proboscidea
Elephas maximus borneensis, Borneo elephant
Order: Perissodactyla
Bornean rhinoceros, Dicerorhinus sumatrensis harrissoni. One individual found in eastern Kalimantan in 2016.
Order: Artiodactyla
Sus barbatus, bearded pig
Tragulus javanicus, lesser mouse-deer
Tragulus napu, greater mouse-deer
Muntiacus atherodes, Bornean yellow muntjac
Muntiacus muntjak, red muntjac
Rusa timorensis, Javan rusa
Rusa unicolor, sambar deer
Bos javanicus, banteng or tembadau. Present in Kalimantan, Sabah, and possibly Sarawak; believed extinct in Brunei.
Extinct
Bornean tiger, possibly EX


Marine Mammal Regulations (MMR) is a set of rules that govern the taking (fishing, hunting) and treatment of marine mammals in Canada. The regulations are part of the Fisheries Act.
The Marine Mammal Regulations s are divided into nine "parts":

Part I - General
Part II - Cetaceans
Part III - Walrus
Part IV - Seals
History
The "Seal Protection Regulations" were established under the Fisheries Act by the Government of Canada in the mid-1960s. The regulations were combined with other Canadian marine mammals regulations in 1993, into the "Marine Mammal Regulations".
A proposed amendment in 2012 would have required boats to stay at least 50 meters away from belugas in Churchill and Seal River, 400 meters away from threatened or endangered cetaceans (including belugas) in parts of the St. Lawrence, 200 meters from cetaceans in other parts of the St. Lawrence, 100 meters away from cetaceans in other Canadian waters, and 100–300 meters from walruses, though Canada did not expect to add spending for enforcement. The proposal was still pending in 2015, supported by some environmental groups for western orcas, and opposed by tour operators for Churchill and Seal River belugas, because of different situations in the two areas.


The U.S. Navy Marine Mammal Program (NMMP) is a program administered by the U.S. Navy which studies the military use of marine mammals - principally bottlenose dolphins and California sea lions - and trains animals to perform tasks such as ship and harbor protection, mine detection and clearance, and equipment recovery. The program is based in San Diego, California, where animals are housed and trained on an ongoing basis. NMMP animal teams have been deployed for use in combat zones, such as during the Vietnam War and the Iraq War.
The program has been dogged by controversy over the treatment of the animals and speculation as to the nature of its mission and training. This has been due at least in part to the secrecy of the program, which was de-classified in the early 1990s. Since the program's inception there have been ongoing animal welfare concerns and opposition to the use of marine mammals in military applications, even in non-combatant roles such as mine detection. The Navy cites external oversight, including ongoing monitoring, in defense of its animal care standards.
History
The origins of the program date back to 1960, when a Pacific white-sided dolphin was acquired for hydrodynamic studies seeking to improve torpedo performance. The aim was to determine whether dolphins had a sophisticated drag-reduction system, but the technology of the day failed to demonstrate that dolphins have any unusual capabilities in this respect. This research has now resumed with the benefit of modern-day technology; among the possible drag-reducing mechanisms being studied for human use are skin compliance, biopolymers, and boundary-layer heating.
In 1962, the animals' intelligence, exceptional diving ability, and trainability led to the foundation of a new research program at Point Mugu, California, where a research facility was built on a sand spit between Mugu Lagoon and the ocean. The intention was to study the dolphins' senses and capabilities, such as their natural sonar and deep-diving physiology, and to determine how dolphins and sea lions might be used to perform useful tasks, such as searching for and marking objects in the water. A major accomplishment was the discovery that trained dolphins and sea lions could be reliably worked untethered in the open sea.
In 1965, a Navy dolphin named Tuffy participated in the SEALAB II project off La Jolla, California, carrying tools and messages between the surface and the habitat 200 feet (60 m) below. Tuffy was also trained to locate and guide lost divers to safety.
In 1967 the NMMP was classified and has since evolved into a major black budget program. The Point Mugu facility and its personnel were relocated to Point Loma in San Diego, and placed under the control of the Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center San Diego. Additionally, a laboratory was established in Hawaii at the Marine Corps Air Station on Kāneʻohe Bay at the northern end of Mokapu Peninsula. However, in 1993, as the result of the Base Realignment and Closure process, the Hawaii lab was closed and the majority of the animals were moved to San Diego; some animals remained, as part of a program of joint research between the Navy and the University of Hawaiʻi.
The program
The Navy Marine Mammal Program is based in San Diego, California, as part of SSC San Diego. The animals are trained in San Diego Bay; dolphin handlers can frequently be seen on the bay, where specialized small boats are used to transport dolphins between their pens and the training areas. Other locations are sometimes used for specific research, such as San Clemente Island in the Channel Islands of California, and torpedo test ranges in Seattle and Canada. The program's stated animal activities include protecting ports and Navy assets from swimmer attack, locating and assisting in the recovery of expensive exercise and training targets, and locating potentially dangerous sea mines.
There are five marine mammal teams, each trained for a specific type of mission. Each human-animal team is known in military jargon by a "mark" number (MK for short); the five teams are called "MK 4", "MK 5", "MK 6", "MK 7", and "MK 8". The MK 4, 7 and 8 teams use dolphins; MK 5 uses sea lions, and MK 6 uses both sea lions and dolphins. These teams can be deployed at 72 hours' notice by ship, aircraft, helicopter, and land vehicle to regional conflicts or staging areas around the world.
Mine hunting
Three of the marine mammal teams are trained to detect enemy sea mines, which constitute a major hazard to U.S. Navy ships. MK 4 uses dolphins to detect and mark the location of tethered sea mines floating off the bottom, while MK 7 dolphins are trained to detect and mark the location of mines on the sea floor or buried in sediment. The MK 8 team is trained to swiftly identify safe corridors for the initial landing of troops ashore.
In operations, a dolphin awaits a cue from its handler before starting to search a specific area using its natural echolocation. The dolphin reports back to its handler, giving particular responses to communicate whether a target object is detected. If a mine-like target is detected, the handler sends the dolphin to mark the location of the object by releasing a buoy, so it can be avoided by Navy vessels or neutralized by Navy divers.
Mine-clearance dolphins were deployed to the Persian Gulf during the Iraq War in 2003. The Navy said these dolphins were effective in helping to detect more than 100 antiship mines and underwater booby traps from the port of Umm Qasr.
Force protection
MK 6 uses dolphins and sea lions as sentries to protect harbor installations and ships against unauthorized human swimmers. MK 6 was first operationally deployed with dolphins during the Vietnam War from 1965 to 1975 and in Bahrain from 1986 to 1988. When an enemy diver is detected by a dolphin, the dolphin approaches from behind and bumps a device into the back of the enemy's air tank.  This device is attached to a buoy which then explodes, alerting the Navy personnel of the intruder. Sea lions carry a similar device in their mouth, but instead attach it by hand-cuffing one of the enemy's limbs.  The animals depend on their superior underwater senses and swimming ability to defend against counterattacks.
Object recovery
MK 5 is dedicated to the recovery of test equipment that is fired from ships or dropped from planes into the ocean; the team uses California sea lions to locate and attach recovery hardware to underwater objects such as practice mines. In this role they can out-perform human divers, who are restricted to short working times and limited repeat diving.
This team first demonstrated its capabilities when it recovered an ASROC (anti submarine rocket) from a depth of 180 feet (50 m) in November 1970. The team has trained in the recovery of dummy victims in a simulated airplane crash.
Attack missions
The Navy says that it has never trained its marine mammals for attack missions against people or ships. The Navy stated that since dolphins cannot discern the difference between enemy and friendly vessels, or divers and swimmers, this would be a haphazard means of warfare; instead, the animals are trained to detect all mines and swimmers in an area of concern, and to report back to their handlers, who then decide upon an appropriate response.
Animals
The Navy identifies the following animal species as having been used or studied by the program at various times:

Bottlenose dolphins and California sea lions are the main animals used, and are kept at the base in San Diego. Dolphins have powerful biological sonar, unmatched by artificial sonar technology in detecting objects in the water column and on the sea floor. Sea lions lack this, but have very sensitive underwater directional hearing and exceptional vision in low-light conditions. Both of these species are trainable and capable of repetitive deep diving. As of the late 1990s, about 140 marine mammals were part of the program.
Animal welfare
There has been controversy related to alleged mistreatment of animals in the program, and controversy continues over the use of marine mammals for military purposes.
The Navy's policy requires that only positive reinforcement techniques be used in the training of their animals, and that they be cared for in accordance with accepted standards. The NMMP says it complies strictly with United States Department of Defense requirements and federal laws regarding the proper care of the animals, including the Marine Mammal Protection Act and the Animal Welfare Act. The program is listed as an accredited institution by the Association for the Accreditation of Animal Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC), whose voluntary accreditation program requires research programs to demonstrate that they meet standards of animal care beyond those required by law. As a standard targeted at laboratory animals, this accreditation requires a specific standard of general animal care, but does not set restrictions on the purposes for which the animals are used. The NMMP is also listed as a member of the Alliance of Marine Mammal Parks and Aquariums. The NMMP protocols for both care and research must be approved by an institutional animal care and use committee (IACUC). The NMMP IACUC includes non-NMMP researchers, veterinarians, and members of the community.
The use of marine mammals by the Navy, even in accordance with the Navy's stated policy, continues to meet opposition. Opponents cite the inevitable stresses involved in this type of training, which is contrary to the animals' natural lifestyles, particularly regarding their confinement when not training. There is continuing controversy over the use of anti-foraging devices, such as muzzles, which prevent the dolphins from foraging for food while working. The Navy states that this is to prevent their ingesting harmful objects, but opponents say that this is done to reinforce the handlers' control over the dolphins, which is based on food rewards. The re-integration and/or extended care of "retired" animals is also a concern.

The field use of the animals is also an issue for some critics, partly because of the stresses involved in transportation  — particularly where dolphins are transported on dry carriers  — as well as stresses arising from the sudden transplantation of the animals into an unfamiliar environment. Dolphins native to areas in which NMMP dolphins are introduced can also pose a threat, since they are known to defend their territory from intruders.
Other people raise the issue of hazards to the animals in their working environments. The risk of accidental detonation of a mine by an animal is of concern to some; the Navy maintains that the chances of this are minimal, because the animals are trained not to touch the mines, which in any case are specifically designed not to be detonated by marine animals. Another fear is that opposing forces, aware of mine-hunting dolphins in a given area, may shoot dolphins in the water, leading to deaths of both NMMP and native animals. Still more criticism comes from the argument that it is immoral or arrogant to involve animals in the conflicts of human beings.
In the media
The NMMP has received much sensational coverage in the media, in some part because of the unusual nature of the program and the controversial concept of using intelligent marine mammals for military purposes. The NMMP was classified until the early 1990s, which also contributed to speculation about its true nature and even its proper title, with some referring to it as the Cetacean Intelligence Mission.
From time to time, stories have surfaced in the media claiming that military dolphins trained for attack missions, or even equipped with weaponry, have escaped and pose a danger to the public, but the Navy has stated that its dolphins have never been trained for any kind of attack mission against ships or people. During Hurricane Katrina in 2005, there were media reports that some of the Navy's dolphins, equipped with poison dart guns and trained to attack hostile swimmers in the water, escaped when their containment area in Lake Pontchartrain was breached, posing a threat to swimmers. However, the Navy reported that all of its dolphins were accounted for, and that its only dolphin training centre is in San Diego. During the hurricane, some dolphins did escape from the unrelated Marine Life Oceanarium in Gulfport, Mississippi, and were subsequently recaptured.
In fiction
The concept of military dolphins has been explored in fiction, notably in the film The Day of the Dolphin (Mike Nichols, 1973) loosely based on the novel Un animal doué de la raison (A Sentient Animal, 1967) by Robert Merle.  Vonda McIntyre published a short story titled "The End's Beginning" with this theme in 1976; it was later collected in the anthology Fireflood. The William Gibson short story "Johnny Mnemonic" and its film adaptation also featured a cyborg dolphin Navy veteran named "Jones" with a talent for decryption, and a heroin addiction. The TV series seaQuest DSV featured a trained dolphin, Darwin, as a member of the crew. Dolphins armed with sonar cannons were also portrayed in the popular video games Red Alert 2 and Red Alert 3. The writer David Brin's book Startide Rising is about genetically engineered dolphins crewing a spaceship. In the Star Trek: The Next Generation USS Enterprise (NCC-1701-D) Blueprints by Rick Sternbach there are multiple cetacean operations locations on decks 13 & 14.


Lists of mammals by region cover mammals found in different parts of the world. They are organized by continent, region, and country, and in some places by sub-national region.
Most are full species lists, while those for Australia and the Caribbean have links to more specific species lists.
AfricaAmericasAsiaEuropeOceania and AntarcticaSee also global lists
List of mammals
Lists of mammals by population


The decline of wild mammal populations globally has been an occurrence spanning over the past 50,000 years, at the same time as the populations of humans and livestock have increased. Nowadays, the total biomass of wild mammals on land is believed to be seven times lower than its prehistoric values, while the biomass of marine mammals had declined fivefold.  At the same time, the biomass of humans is "an order of magnitude higher than that of all wild mammals", and the biomass of livestock mammals like pigs and cattle is even larger than that. Even as wild mammals had declined, the growth in the numbers of humans and livestock had increased total mammal biomass fourfold. Only 4% of that increased number are wild mammals, while livestock and humans amount to 60% and 36%. Alongside the simultaneous halving of plant biomass, these striking declines are considered part of the prehistoric phase of the Holocene extinction.
Since the second half of the 20th century, a range of protected areas and other wildlife conservation efforts (such as the Repopulation of wolves in Midwestern United States) have been implemented. These have had some impact on preserving wild mammal numbers. There is still some debate over the total extent of recent declines in wild mammals and other vertebrate species. In any case, many species are now in a worse state than decades ago. Hundreds of species are critically endangered. Climate change also has negative impacts on land mammal populations.
Declines in geologic and prehistoric timeframes
Historically, the Quaternary extinction event was the most dramatic episode of wild mammal decline, as it saw the disappearance of appromixately half of all terrestrial mammal species with a body mass greater than 40 kg. Statistically, this meant a 14% reduction in the average body size of wildlife over the past 125,000 years.  While some researchers attribute that eradication of all non-African megafauna to prehistoric climate change, most now believe it was wholly or predominantly driven by human activity. Many wild mammal species continued to decline at a slower rate afterwards. Prominent examples on land include the collapse of historic American bison herds on the Great Plains, or the extinction of a wide range of small marsupials in Australia. On sea, whaling drove similarly severe declines in the numbers of marine mammals. The total numbers of wild mammals are unlikely to recover to anywhere near their prehistoric peaks, as the historic replacement of forests and wetlands with cropland and pasture means that the Earth's carrying capacity for wild terrestrial species will remain lowered unless it is reversed.
Causes of human-related decline
As the human population grew and colonization pushed deeper around the globe, and as the environmental footprint of the average human has grown, so has the pressure on ecosystems, and their inhabitants, including wild mammals. Over the past several centuries, wild mammal extinctions tended to be concentrated among the small island species, whose endemic populations are constrained in size and range by their limited habitat, and in Australia, where similar dynamics have played out. Since the European settlement  10% of Australia's 273 terrestrial mammals went extinct, (a loss of one to two species per decade). Currently, 21% of Australia's mammals are threatened, and unlike in most other continents, the main cause is predation by feral species, such as cats.
In general, habitat degradation, through activities such as deforestation for land development, is currently the main anthropogenic cause of species extinctions. The main cause of habitat degradation worldwide is agriculture, with urban sprawl, logging, mining and some fishing practices close behind.
Disease can also be a factor: white nose syndrome in bats, for example, is causing a substantial decline in their populations and may even lead to the extinction of a species. Another example is the Devil facial tumour disease, which has devastated populations of Tasmanian devils. For wild mammals, overhunting can have a proportionally greater impact than on the other wild animals. Terrestrial mammals, such as the tiger and deer, are mainly hunted for their pelts and in some cases meat, and marine mammals can be hunted for their oil and leather. Specific targeting of one species can resonate through the wider ecosystem due to coextinction processes, especially if the targeted species is a keystone species. Sea otters, for example, were hunted in the maritime fur trade, and their drop in population led to the rise in sea urchins—their main food source—which decreased the population of kelp—the sea urchin's and Steller's sea cow's main food source—leading to the extinction of the Steller's sea cow. The hunting of an already limited species can easily lead to its extinction, as with the bluebuck whose range was confined to 1,700 square miles (4,400 km2) and which was hunted into extinction soon after discovery by European settlers.
Such pressures on wild species can be alleviated through wildlife conservation efforts, such as the establishment of protected areas. From 1996 to 2008, conservation efforts in 109 countries reduced the extinction risk of their wild mammals and birds by 29%, while conservation action throughout 2010s lowered the average extinction risk of birds, mammals and amphibians by at least 20%. Some mammal-specific successes include the conservation of ungulates, 6% of which would have likely been extinct or extinct in the wild without them. Another example is the rebound of wolf populations across much of Europe and North America, including through measures such as Repopulation of wolves in Midwestern United States. On sea, the decline of whaling had seen rebounds of a range of species, such as blue whales and humpback whales. However, about a third of marine mammals are still considered to be at risk of extinction.
There is some debate over the severity of declining trends in the global mammal and the broader vertebrate population: while the Living Planet Report of the World Wide Fund for Nature reported a 68% decline in the aggregate wild vertebrate populations since 1970, a scientific reanalysis of its data in Nature found that 98.6% of vertebrate populations show no global trend over that period, with vertebrate declines disproportionately driven by 1% of the species, mostly clustered in the Indo-Pacific region and among several reptile and amphibian groups. Even so, that "extremely declining" cluster also includes many "larger animals", which are often mammals. A separate analysis of 177 mammal species with the most-detailed data found that all of them have lost over 30% of their geographic range, and over 40% retain less than a fifth of their past range, which is impossible without a severe decline in population. Examples of notable mammals with declining populations include pangolins, cheetahs (around 7,000 individuals) and Sumatran and Borneo orangutans (no more than 5,000 combined), or even the 43% drop for the African lion population since 1993 due to declines in West Africa.  Globally, 27% of mammal species are threatened with extinction, while 233 species are critically endangered. 74 mammal species are believed to be "on the brink", meaning that they retain fewer than 1000 members, with many of those possessing fewer than 250 members.
Climate change
Current climate change influences species survival in a given area. Some of the first studies of the influence of climatic variables on wild mammals took place in the United States in 1960s. They analysed the impacts of severe winter weather events on the survival and reproduction of species such as Missouri cottontails and northern Montana Pronghorns., sometimes using radio transmitters.  As the warming progressed, such severe winter weather decreased, and instead,  warming of previously very cold places, such as the High Arctic can wreak havoc with the ecosystems. For instance, warming-driven increase in precipitation causes warm rain to fall onto the permafrost, which becomes unstable and can collapse from the mountainsides in avalanches.  On multiple instances, this has blocked the winter food supply of reindeer populations, and led to their mass starvation in places like the Svalbard of Norway and the Yamal Peninsula of Russia: in the latter area, 61,000 reindeer died over the 2013–2014 winter as the result.
In 2019, historical records from the past 300 years were used to quantify both anthropogenic and climate stressors and their role in te local extinction of 11 medium- and large-sized animals in China. Both climate warming and cooling can cause range shifts and local extinction of animals, but quantitative evidence is rare due to the lack of long-term spatial-temporal data. In Extreme temperature change was negatively associated with increased local extinction of mammals such as the gibbon, macaque, tiger, and water deer. Researchers concluded that while premodern cooling trend may have contributed to extinctions of tiger subspecies in the west and north of China, the recent global warming might contribute to the complete extinction of tigers in southern China.

In all, climate change is already believed to have had negative impacts on 47% of flightless land mammals. While "flightless" excludes bats, there's also substantial evidence of them being negatively affected. For instance, Brazilian free-tailed bats are forced to emerge to feed earlier in the evening as their region becomes drier, even if it exposes them to more predators or competitor insectivores. In other places, bats have been exposed to increased mortality due to heat stress. In Australia, flying foxes live comfortably below 42 °C (108 °F), but climate change caused a heatwave in 2014, which led to thousands of flying fox deaths. Mass mortality was highly visible, to the point fire trucks were deployed to spray the bats in an attempt to cool them down. A third of the entire species is believed to have been lost in that event. 2019–2020 Australia bushfire season had killed over 1 billion animals and displaced around 2 billion more, including large numbers of threatened or endangered mammal species such as koalas.  And in the wake of 2019 Amazon rainforest wildfires, the World Wildlife Fund concluded that the jaguar  is already "near threatened" and the loss of food supplies and habitat due to the fires make the situation more critical. The fires affect water chemistry (such as decreasing the amount of dissolved oxygen in the water), temperature, and erosion rates, which in turn affects fish and mammals that depend on fish, such as the giant otter (Pteronura brasiliensis).
Relative to the rate of climate change, evolutionary change is usually considered to be too slow to allow for genetic adaptation among species. However, microevolution is a genetic adaptation that deals with heritable shifts in allele frequencies in a population and is not characterized by the slow process of speciation, or the formation of a new distinct species.  However, larger terrestrial animals (including many mammals) usually cannot adapt with microevolution, as the rate of climate change is still too fast for this evolutionary process. Some, like the kangaroo, can still benefit from a very broad climatic tolerance. Others would have to rely on phenotypic plasticity. A plastic response to climate change includes expressing a different phenotype that may lead to differing morphology, phenology, or rate of activity . Unlike genetic adaptation, phenotypic plasticity allows the animal itself to respond to climate change without a change in its genetic makeup. This mechanism that allows this process involves changes in DNA packaging in the nucleus that alters the chance of a particular gene being expressed. Phenological changes are observed and taken as evidence that species are adjusting to environmental changes.
Although species may adapt to changing climates, either through genetic or phenotypic adaptation, all species have limits to their capacity for adaptive response to changing temperatures. However, only around 4% of all mammals that are deemed climate sensitive by the IUC have been studied in regards to linking their demographic composition (i.e. survival, development, and reproduction) to climate change. There is a large discrepancy between the locations of demographic studies and the species that are currently assessed as most vulnerable to climate change. It is also incredibly difficult for studies to focus specifically and determine a straightforward relationship between limited tolerance to high temperatures and local extinction, as a diverse set of factors, such as food abundance, human activity, and mismatched timing, can all play a role in a species' local or mass extinction. To assess population viability under climate change, more coordinated actions need to be prioritized and taken to collect data on how different species' demographic rates can persist and respond to climate change.
Specific predictions of population decline or extinction


Stirtonia is an extinct genus of New World monkeys from the Middle Miocene (Laventan in the South American land mammal ages; 13.8 to 11.8 Ma). Its remains have been found at the Konzentrat-Lagerstätte of La Venta in the Honda Group of Colombia. Two species have been described, S. victoriae and the type species S. tatacoensis. Synonyms are Homunculus tatacoensis, described by Ruben Arthur Stirton in 1951 and Kondous laventicus by Setoguchi in 1985. The genus is classified in Alouattini as an ancestor to the modern howler monkeys.
Etymology
Stirtonia is named after the scientist who first discovered it, Ruben Arthur Stirton. The two species, S. tatcoensis and S. victoriae, are named after the locations in which they were found: S. tatacoensis gets its name from the Tatacoa desert; and S. victoriae gets its name from the village “La Victoria” near its discovery site.
Description
The genus is the largest primate found at La Venta, with estimated body masses of S. tatacoensis at 5,513 grams (12.154 lb) and of S. victoriae at 10 kilograms (22 lb). Stirtonia tatacoensis and S. victoriae are known by several teeth, a mandible and a maxilla that closely resemble, and are almost indistinguishable from, the living Alouatta.
Fossil teeth found in the Solimões Formation at the Acre River in the border region of Brazil and Peru may belong to Stirtonia.
Fossil record
A lower mandible fossil of S. tatacoensis was discovered during fieldwork between 1944 and 1949, in the Honda Group, that has been dated to the Laventan, about 13 Ma.
Upper jaws and other cranial material of the large primate Stirtonia victoriae from the Perico Member of the La Dorada Formation, Honda Group were discovered in 1985 and 1986. Based on stratigraphic position, more than 300 metres (980 ft) below the Stirtonia tatacoensis type locality, this was the oldest primate material known until 1987 from Colombia.
Evolution
The evolutionary split between Atelidae, of which Stirtonia, and Pitheciidae plus Callicebus, has been placed at 17.0 million years ago.
PalaeobiologyPalaeoecology
Geometric morphometric analysis suggests that S. victoriae was a folivore.
Habitat
The Honda Group, and more precisely the "Monkey Beds", are the richest site for fossil primates in South America. It has been argued that the monkeys of the Honda Group were living in habitat that was in contact with the Amazon and Orinoco Basins, and that La Venta itself was probably seasonally dry forest. From the same level as where Stirtonia tatacoensis has been found, also fossils of Aotus dindensis, Micodon, Mohanamico, Saimiri annectens, Saimiri fieldsi and Cebupithecia have been uncovered. Stirtonia reinforced the notion that leaf-eating was an
enduring and essential aspect of the howler monkey's ecophylogenetic biology.


Talpa is a genus in the mole family Talpidae. Among the first taxa in science, Carolus Linnaeus used the Latin word for "mole", talpa, in his Regnum Animale to refer to the commonly known European form of mole. The group has since been expanded to include 13 extant species, found primarily in Europe and western Asia. The European mole, found throughout most of Europe, is a member of this genus, as are several species restricted to small ranges. One species, Père David's mole, is data deficient. These moles eat earthworms, insects, and other invertebrates found in the soil.
The females of this genus have rudimentary male features such as Cowper's glands and a two-lobed prostate. A group of scientists has suggested that they are true hermaphrodites; however, others state that they are fully functional females.
There are 14 species in this genus:

Altai mole, T. altaica
Aquitanian mole, T. aquitania
Blind mole, T. caeca
Caucasian mole, T. caucasica
Père David's mole, T. davidiana
European mole, T. europaea
T. hakkariensis Gündüz, Demirtaş, Silsüpür, Özmen, Polly & Bilton, 2023
Levant mole, T. levantis
Martino's mole, T. martinorum
Spanish mole, T. occidentalis
Ognev's mole, T. ognevi
Roman mole, T. romana
Balkan mole, T. stankovici
Talysch mole, T. talyschensis
In addition, several extinct species are known from fossil remains, here the list:

†Talpa tyrrhenica
†Talpa fossilis Petenyi, 1864
†Talpa praeglacialis Kormos, 1930
†Talpa minor Freudenberg, 1914
†Talpa vallesensis Villalta & Crusafont, 1944
†Talpa episcopalis Kormos, 1930
†Talpa gilothi Storch, 1978
†Talpa minuta Blainville, 1840
†Talpa gracilis Kormos, 1930
†Talpa neagui Radulescu & Samson, 1989
†Talpa tenuidentata Ziegler, 1990
†Talpa sansaniensis Lartet, 1851
The current phylogeny of the species in the genus is shown below:


Asmodeus is an extinct genus of mammal, belonging to the order Notoungulata. It lived during the Late Oligocene, in what is today South America.
Description
This animal was relatively heavy-shaped, with long, strong and slender limbs. Its hand had four fingers, and a reduced fifth metacarpal. The main characteristic of Asmodeus, which shows its affinities with its relative Homalodotherium, is in the shape of its forelimbs, which made the hind legs lower than the forelegs. The front legs were clawed, and not hooved as in most of the known toxodonts. Compared to Homalodotherium, the reduction of the fifth metacarpal was less important in Asmodeus.
Classification
First described in 1894 by Florentino Ameghino, Asmodeus belonged to the family Homalodotheriidae, a group of notoungulates with characteristically elongated and clawed front legs. Two species of Asmodeus are known, including A. osborni, the type species, from the Deseado Formation of Argentine Patagonia, and A. petrasnerus from the Agua de la Piedra Formation in the Mendoza Province of Northern Argentina. The species are mainly distinguished by characteristics of the talus and the calcaneus.


In zoology, megafauna (from Greek μέγας megas 'large' and Neo-Latin fauna 'animal life') are large animals. The precise definition of the term varies widely, though a common threshold is approximately 45 kilograms (99 lb), this lower end being centered on humans, with other thresholds being more relative to the sizes of animals in an ecosystem. The spectrum of lower-end thresholds ranges from 10 kilograms (22 lb) to 1,000 kilograms (2,200 lb), the latter largely restricted to megaherbivores. Large body size is generally associated with other traits, such as having a slow rate of reproduction and, in large herbivores, reduced or negligible adult mortality from predation.
Megafauna species have considerable effects on their local environment, including the suppression of the growth of woody vegetation and a consequent reduction in wildfire frequency. Megafauna also play a role in regulating and stabilizing the abundance of smaller animals.
During the Pleistocene, megafauna were diverse across the globe, with most continental ecosystems exhibiting similar or greater species richness in megafauna as compared to ecosystems in Africa today. During the Late Pleistocene, particularly from around 50,000 years ago onwards, most large mammal species became extinct, including 80% of all mammals greater than 1,000 kilograms (2,200 lb), while small animals were largely unaffected. This pronouncedly size-biased extinction is otherwise unprecedented in the geological record. Humans and climatic change have been implicated by most authors as the likely causes, though the relative importance of either factor has been the subject of significant controversy.
Terminology
One of the earliest occurrences of the term "megafauna" is Alfred Russel Wallace's 1876 work The geographical distribution of animals. He described the animals as "the hugest, and fiercest, and strangest forms". In the 20th and 21st centuries, the term usually refers to large animals. There are variations in thresholds used to define megafauna as a whole or certain groups of megafauna. Many scientific literature adopt Paul S. Martin's proposed threshold of 45 kilograms (99 lb) to classify animals as megafauna. However, for freshwater species, 30 kilograms (66 lb) is the preferred threshold. Some scientists define herbivorous terrestrial megafauna as having a weight exceeding 100 kilograms (220 lb), and terrestrial carnivorous megafauna as more than 15 kilograms (33 lb). Additionally, Owen-Smith coined the term megaherbivore to describe herbivores that weighed over 1,000 kilograms (2,200 lb), which has seen some use by other researchers.
Among living animals, the term megafauna is most commonly used for the largest extant terrestrial mammals, which include (but are not limited to) elephants, giraffes, hippopotamuses, rhinoceroses, and larger bovines. Of these five categories of large herbivores, only bovines are presently found outside of Africa and Asia, but all the others were formerly more wide-ranging, with their ranges and populations continually shrinking and decreasing over time. Wild equines are another example of megafauna, but their current ranges are largely restricted to the Old World, specifically in Africa and Asia. Megafaunal species may be categorized according to their dietary type: megaherbivores (e.g., elephants), megacarnivores (e.g., lions), and megaomnivores (e.g., bears).
Definition
Since the term "megafauna" was first proposed, the scientific community has not settled on a single, succinct definition. However, recent scholarship has been in support of ecological definitions. A 2020 study in Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences analyzed 276 pieces of literature to categorize the different uses of the term. The study determined two typical uses: "keystone megafauna" and "functional megafauna," with a subcategory of "apex megafauna." Subsequently, these categories reflected how the term has evolved amongst the academic scientific community. Despite each of these attempts at categorization, there remains no set standard, as definitions vary based on specific habitats, groups being studied and context.
Keystone megafauna
First defined by Robert T. Paine in 1969, a keystone species is a population whose activity meets a disproportional amount of needs that other species in a habitat depend on. Their function is further illustrated by the effects of their absence. Losing these species can cause natural ecological processes to unravel, leading to further environmental decline. Keystone megafauna's larger mass and range is significant to such roles they play in their ecosystems. Distinguishing a keystone megafauna from the other categories depends on the individual species' size and their implications for the function of the habitat. Although small species can also function as keystones, they do not meet the sizing criteria of megafauna.
Functional megafauna
Functional megafauna refers to the species that are currently seen as the largest in their taxonomical group and that tend to have identifiable advantages in their habitat due to their size. The term "functional" in this case refers to the traits that contribute to the ability allowing these species to use their size. The actual mass minimum with this definition will vary between the individuals SPECIFY classification, like how herbivores typically reach around 1000 kg to be considered whereas carnivores need only be around 13–16 kg. Apex megafauna is an additional term to be used for these species within this category.
Apex megafauna
"Apex" is a term usually used to describe apex predators. Apex predators are carnivorous species who dominate the habitat they reside in, being at the top of the food chain and having large hunting ranges. The difference for these megafauna species, humans for example, lies in their unlikeliness to become prey which increases significantly into adulthood, whether it is because of predation status or their size. Large animals that are not predators can fit into this apex ideation because, similarly, their range is more influenced by the capacity of the habitat rather than the typical phenomenon of being hunted for population control.
Ecological strategy
Megafauna tend to display the ecological role of K-strategists, with high longevity, slow population growth rates, low mortality rates, and (at least for the largest) few or no natural predators capable of killing adults. These characteristics, although not exclusive to such megafauna, make them vulnerable to human overexploitation, in part because of their slow population recovery rates.
Megafauna are considerable contributors to the environments they populate in. The lasting effects of megafauna have been studied, such as Enquist's paper that considered the results from notable megafauna extinction events. During the Anthropocene, many larger species declined in populations (flora and fauna both), which was found to have profound downward effects on the total biosphere activity. This can be attributed to losing these species that assist in many natural processes, like creating new soil, cycling carbon, and population control of the other species. According to simulations and studies done based on current global conditions, removing megafauna from a habitat would leave niches to be filled by smaller plants and animals, upsetting the stable chain of systems that is currently functioning.
Evolution of large body size
One observation that has been made about the evolution of larger body size is that rapid rates of increase that are often seen over relatively short time intervals are not sustainable over much longer time periods. In an examination of mammal body mass changes over time, the maximum increase possible in a given time interval was found to scale with the interval length raised to the 0.25 power. This is thought to reflect the emergence, during a trend of increasing maximum body size, of a series of anatomical, physiological, environmental, genetic and other constraints that must be overcome by evolutionary innovations before further size increases are possible. A strikingly faster rate of change was found for large decreases in body mass, such as may be associated with the phenomenon of insular dwarfism. When normalized to generation length, the maximum rate of body mass decrease was found to be over 30 times greater than the maximum rate of body mass increase for a ten-fold change.
In terrestrial mammals
Subsequent to the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event that eliminated the non-avian dinosaurs about 66 Ma (million years) ago, terrestrial mammals underwent a nearly exponential increase in body size as they diversified to occupy the ecological niches left vacant. Starting from just a few kg before the event, maximum size had reached ~50 kilograms (110 lb) a few million years later, and ~750 kilograms (1,650 lb) by the end of the Paleocene. This trend of increasing body mass appears to level off about 40 Ma ago (in the late Eocene), suggesting that physiological or ecological constraints had been reached, after an increase in body mass of over three orders of magnitude. However, when considered from the standpoint of rate of size increase per generation, the exponential increase is found to have continued until the appearance of Indricotherium 30 Ma ago. (Since generation time scales with body mass0.259, increasing generation times with increasing size cause the log mass vs. time plot to curve downward from a linear fit.)
Megaherbivores eventually attained a body mass of over 10,000 kilograms (22,000 lb). The largest of these, indricotheres and proboscids, have been hindgut fermenters, which are believed to have an advantage over foregut fermenters in terms of being able to accelerate gastrointestinal transit in order to accommodate very large food intakes. A similar trend emerges when rates of increase of maximum body mass per generation for different mammalian clades are compared (using rates averaged over macroevolutionary time scales). Among terrestrial mammals, the fastest rates of increase of body mass0.259 vs. time (in Ma) occurred in perissodactyls (a slope of 2.1), followed by rodents (1.2) and proboscids (1.1), all of which are hindgut fermenters. The rate of increase for artiodactyls (0.74) was about a third of the perissodactyls. The rate for carnivorans (0.65) was slightly lower yet, while primates, perhaps constrained by their arboreal habits, had the lowest rate (0.39) among the mammalian groups studied.
Terrestrial mammalian carnivores from several eutherian groups (the artiodactyl Andrewsarchus – formerly considered a mesonychid, the oxyaenid Sarkastodon, and the carnivorans Amphicyon and Arctodus) all reached a maximum size of about 1,000 kilograms (2,200 lb) (the carnivoran Arctotherium and the hyaenodontid Simbakubwa may have been somewhat larger). The largest known metatherian carnivore, Proborhyaena gigantea, apparently reached 600 kilograms (1,300 lb), also close to this limit. A similar theoretical maximum size for mammalian carnivores has been predicted based on the metabolic rate of mammals, the energetic cost of obtaining prey, and the maximum estimated rate coefficient of prey intake. It has also been suggested that maximum size for mammalian carnivores is constrained by the stress the humerus can withstand at top running speed.
Analysis of the variation of maximum body size over the last 40 Ma suggests that decreasing temperature and increasing continental land area are associated with increasing maximum body size. The former correlation would be consistent with Bergmann's rule, and might be related to the thermoregulatory advantage of large body mass in cool climates, better ability of larger organisms to cope with seasonality in food supply, or other factors; the latter correlation could be explained in terms of range and resource limitations. However, the two parameters are interrelated (due to sea level drops accompanying increased glaciation), making the driver of the trends in maximum size more difficult to identify.
In marine mammals
Since tetrapods (first reptiles, later mammals) returned to the sea in the Late Permian, they have dominated the top end of the marine body size range, due to the more efficient intake of oxygen possible using lungs. The ancestors of cetaceans are believed to have been the semiaquatic pakicetids, no larger than dogs, of about 53 million years (Ma) ago. By 40 Ma ago, cetaceans had attained a length of 20 m (66 ft) or more in Basilosaurus, an elongated, serpentine whale that differed from modern whales in many respects and was not ancestral to them. Following this, the evolution of large body size in cetaceans appears to have come to a temporary halt and then to have backtracked, although the available fossil records are limited. However, in the period from 31 Ma ago (in the Oligocene) to the present, cetaceans underwent a significantly more rapid sustained increase in body mass (a rate of increase in body mass0.259 of a factor of 3.2 per million years) than achieved by any group of terrestrial mammals. This trend led to the largest animal of all time, the modern blue whale. Several reasons for the more rapid evolution of large body size in cetaceans are possible. Fewer biomechanical constraints on increases in body size may be associated with suspension in water as opposed to standing against the force of gravity, and with swimming movements as opposed to terrestrial locomotion. Also, the greater heat capacity and thermal conductivity of water compared to air may increase the thermoregulatory advantage of large body size in marine endotherms, although diminishing returns apply.
Among the toothed whales, maximum body size appears to be limited by food availability. Larger size, as in sperm and beaked whales, facilitates deeper diving to access relatively easily-caught, large cephalopod prey in a less competitive environment. Compared to odontocetes, the efficiency of baleen whales' filter feeding scales more favorably with increasing size when planktonic food is dense, making larger sizes more advantageous. The lunge feeding technique of rorquals appears to be more energy efficient than the ram feeding of balaenid whales; the latter technique is used with less dense and patchy plankton. The cooling trend in Earth's recent history may have generated more localities of high plankton abundance via wind-driven upwellings, facilitating the evolution of gigantic whales.
Cetaceans are not the only marine mammals to reach tremendous sizes. The largest mammal carnivorans of all time are marine pinnipeds, the largest of which is the southern elephant seal, which can reach more than 6 m (20 ft) in length and weigh up to 5,000 kg (11,000 lb). Other large pinnipeds include the northern elephant seal at 4,000 kg (8,800 lb), walrus at 2,000 kg (4,400 lb), and Steller sea lion at 1,135 kg (2,502 lb). The sirenians are another group of marine mammals which adapted to fully aquatic life around the same time as the cetaceans did. Sirenians are closely related to elephants. The largest sirenian was the Steller's sea cow, which reached up to 10 m (33 ft) in length and weighed 8,000 to 10,000 kg (18,000 to 22,000 lb), and was hunted to extinction in the 18th century.
In flightless birds
Because of the small initial size of all mammals following the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs, nonmammalian vertebrates had a roughly ten-million-year-long window of opportunity (during the Paleocene) for evolution of gigantism without much competition. During this interval, apex predator niches were often occupied by reptiles, such as terrestrial crocodilians (e.g. Pristichampsus), large snakes (e.g. Titanoboa) or varanid lizards, or by flightless birds (e.g. Paleopsilopterus in South America). This is also the period when megafaunal flightless herbivorous gastornithid birds evolved in the Northern Hemisphere, while flightless paleognaths evolved to large size on Gondwanan land masses and Europe. Gastornithids and at least one lineage of flightless paleognath birds originated in Europe, both lineages dominating niches for large herbivores while mammals remained below 45 kilograms (99 lb) (in contrast with other landmasses like North America and Asia, which saw the earlier evolution of larger mammals) and were the largest European tetrapods in the Paleocene.
Flightless paleognaths, termed ratites, have traditionally been viewed as representing a lineage separate from that of their small flighted relatives, the Neotropic tinamous. However, recent genetic studies have found that tinamous nest well within the ratite tree, and are the sister group of the extinct moa of New Zealand. Similarly, the small kiwi of New Zealand have been found to be the sister group of the extinct elephant birds of Madagascar. These findings indicate that flightlessness and gigantism arose independently multiple times among ratites via parallel evolution.
Predatory megafaunal flightless birds were often able to compete with mammals in the early Cenozoic. Later in the Cenozoic, however, they were displaced by advanced carnivorans and died out. In North America, the bathornithids Paracrax and Bathornis were apex predators but became extinct by the Early Miocene. In South America, the related phorusrhacids shared the dominant predatory niches with metatherian sparassodonts during most of the Cenozoic but declined and ultimately went extinct after eutherian predators arrived from North America (as part of the Great American Interchange) during the Pliocene. In contrast, large herbivorous flightless ratites have survived to the present.
However, none of the flightless birds of the Cenozoic, including the predatory Brontornis, possibly omnivorous Dromornis stirtoni or herbivorous Aepyornis, ever grew to masses much above 500 kilograms (1,100 lb); thus, they never attained the size of the largest mammalian carnivores, let alone that of the largest mammalian herbivores. It has been suggested that the increasing thickness of avian eggshells in proportion to egg mass with increasing egg size places an upper limit on the size of birds. The largest species of Dromornis, D. stirtoni, may have gone extinct after it attained the maximum avian body mass and was then outcompeted by marsupial diprotodonts that evolved to sizes several times larger.
In giant turtles
Giant tortoises were important components of late Cenozoic megafaunas, being present in every nonpolar continent until the arrival of homininans. The largest known terrestrial tortoise was Megalochelys atlas, an animal that probably weighed about 1,000 kg (2,200 lb).
Some earlier aquatic Testudines, e.g. the marine Archelon of the Cretaceous and freshwater Stupendemys of the Miocene, were considerably larger, weighing more than 2,000 kg (4,400 lb).
Megafaunal mass extinctionsTiming and possible causes
Numerous extinctions occurred during the latter half of the Last Glacial Period when most large mammals went extinct in the Americas, Australia-New Guinea, and Eurasia, including over 80% of all terrestrial animals with a body mass greater than 1,000 kilograms (2,200 lb). Small animals and other organisms like plants were generally unaffected by the extinctions, which is unprecented in previous extinctions during the last 30 million years.
Various theories have attributed the wave of extinctions to human hunting, climate change, disease, extraterrestrial impact, competition from other animals or other causes. However, this extinction near the end of the Pleistocene was just one of a series of megafaunal extinction pulses that have occurred during the last 50,000 years over much of the Earth's surface, with Africa and Asia (where the local megafauna had a chance to evolve alongside modern humans) being comparatively less affected. The latter areas did suffer gradual attrition of megafauna, particularly of the slower-moving species (a class of vulnerable megafauna epitomized by giant tortoises), over the last several million years.
Outside the mainland of Afro-Eurasia, these megafaunal extinctions followed a highly distinctive landmass-by-landmass pattern that closely parallels the spread of humans into previously uninhabited regions of the world, and which shows no overall correlation with climatic history (which can be visualized with plots over recent geological time periods of climate markers such as marine oxygen isotopes or atmospheric carbon dioxide levels). Australia and nearby islands (e.g., Flores) were struck first around 46,000 years ago, followed by Tasmania about 41,000 years ago (after formation of a land bridge to Australia about 43,000 years ago). The role of humans in the extinction of Australia and New Guinea's megafauna has been disputed, with multiple studies showing a decline in the number of species prior to the arrival of humans on the continent and the absence of any evidence of human predation; the impact of climate change has instead been cited for their decline. Similarly, Japan lost most of its megafauna apparently about 30,000 years ago, North America 13,000 years ago and South America about 500 years later, Cyprus 10,000 years ago, the Antilles 6,000 years ago, New Caledonia and nearby islands 3,000 years ago, Madagascar 2,000 years ago, New Zealand 700 years ago, the Mascarenes 400 years ago, and the Commander Islands 250 years ago. Nearly all of the world's isolated islands could furnish similar examples of extinctions occurring shortly after the arrival of humans, though most of these islands, such as the Hawaiian Islands, never had terrestrial megafauna, so their extinct fauna were smaller, but still displayed island gigantism.
An analysis of the timing of Holarctic megafaunal extinctions and extirpations over the last 56,000 years has revealed a tendency for such events to cluster within interstadials, periods of abrupt warming, but only when humans were also present. Humans may have impeded processes of migration and recolonization that would otherwise have allowed the megafaunal species to adapt to the climate shift. In at least some areas, interstadials were periods of expanding human populations.
An analysis of Sporormiella fungal spores (which derive mainly from the dung of megaherbivores) in swamp sediment cores spanning the last 130,000 years from Lynch's Crater in Queensland, Australia, showed that the megafauna of that region virtually disappeared about 41,000 years ago, at a time when climate changes were minimal; the change was accompanied by an increase in charcoal, and was followed by a transition from rainforest to fire-tolerant sclerophyll vegetation. The high-resolution chronology of the changes supports the hypothesis that human hunting alone eliminated the megafauna, and that the subsequent change in flora was most likely a consequence of the elimination of browsers and an increase in fire. The increase in fire lagged the disappearance of megafauna by about a century, and most likely resulted from accumulation of fuel once browsing stopped. Over the next several centuries grass increased; sclerophyll vegetation increased with a lag of another century, and a sclerophyll forest developed after about another thousand years. During two periods of climate change about 120,000 and 75,000 years ago, sclerophyll vegetation had also increased at the site in response to a shift to cooler, drier conditions; neither of these episodes had a significant impact on megafaunal abundance. Similar conclusions regarding the culpability of human hunters in the disappearance of Pleistocene megafauna were derived from high-resolution chronologies obtained via an analysis of a large collection of eggshell fragments of the flightless Australian bird Genyornis newtoni, from analysis of Sporormiella fungal spores from a lake in eastern North America and from study of deposits of Shasta ground sloth dung left in over half a dozen caves in the American Southwest.
Continuing human hunting and environmental disturbance has led to additional megafaunal extinctions in the recent past, and has created a serious danger of further extinctions in the near future (see examples below). Direct killing by humans, primarily for meat or other body parts, is the most significant factor in contemporary megafaunal decline.
A number of other mass extinctions occurred earlier in Earth's geologic history, in which some or all of the megafauna of the time also died out. Famously, in the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event, the non-avian dinosaurs and most other giant reptiles were eliminated. However, the earlier mass extinctions were more global and not so selective for megafauna; i.e., many species of other types, including plants, marine invertebrates and plankton, went extinct as well. Thus, the earlier events must have been caused by more generalized types of disturbances to the biosphere.
Consequences of depletion of megafauna
Depletion of herbivorous megafauna results in increased growth of woody vegetation, and a consequent increase in wildfire frequency. Megafauna may help to suppress the growth of invasive plants. Large herbivores and carnivores can suppress the abundance of smaller animals, resulting in their population increase when megafauna are removed.
Effect on nutrient transport
Megafauna play a significant role in the lateral transport of mineral nutrients in an ecosystem, tending to translocate them from areas of high to those of lower abundance. They do so by their movement between the time they consume the nutrient and the time they release it through elimination (or, to a much lesser extent, through decomposition after death). In South America's Amazon Basin, it is estimated that such lateral diffusion was reduced over 98% following the megafaunal extinctions that occurred roughly 12,500 years ago. Given that phosphorus availability is thought to limit productivity in much of the region, the decrease in its transport from the western part of the basin and from floodplains (both of which derive their supply from the uplift of the Andes) to other areas is thought to have significantly impacted the region's ecology, and the effects may not yet have reached their limits. In the sea, cetaceans and pinnipeds that feed at depth are thought to translocate nitrogen from deep to shallow water, enhancing ocean productivity, and counteracting the activity of zooplankton, which tend to do the opposite.
Effect on methane emissions
Large populations of megaherbivores have the potential to contribute greatly to the atmospheric concentration of methane, which is an important greenhouse gas. Modern ruminant herbivores produce methane as a byproduct of foregut fermentation in digestion and release it through belching or flatulence. Today, around 20% of annual methane emissions come from livestock methane release. In the Mesozoic, it has been estimated that sauropods could have emitted 520 million tons of methane to the atmosphere annually, contributing to the warmer climate of the time (up to 10 °C (18 °F) warmer than at present). This large emission follows from the enormous estimated biomass of sauropods, and because methane production of individual herbivores is believed to be almost proportional to their mass.
Recent studies have indicated that the extinction of megafaunal herbivores may have caused a reduction in atmospheric methane. This hypothesis is relatively new. One study examined the methane emissions from the bison that occupied the Great Plains of North America before contact with European settlers. The study estimated that the removal of the bison caused a decrease of as much as 2.2 million tons per year. Another study examined the change in the methane concentration in the atmosphere at the end of the Pleistocene epoch after the extinction of megafauna in the Americas. After early humans migrated to the Americas about 13,000 BP, their hunting and other associated ecological impacts led to the extinction of many megafaunal species there. Calculations suggest that this extinction decreased methane production by about 9.6 million tons per year. This suggests that the absence of megafaunal methane emissions may have contributed to the abrupt climatic cooling at the onset of the Younger Dryas. The decrease in atmospheric methane that occurred at that time, as recorded in ice cores, was 2 to 4 times more rapid than any other decrease in the last half million years, suggesting that an unusual mechanism was at work.
Current studies
Current studies being completed on megafauna species are reflective, and do not tend to offer a set definition of the subject; additionally, some consider there to be a significant lack in cross-disciplinary studies. Many consider megafauna to be increasingly important in the topic of conservation and climate change. Research set on specifically megafauna would increase the understanding of global environments and habitat system interactions.
Enquist's paper on megabiota found that climate change has caused a fast-spreading decrease of large animals. This finding implicates that many of the world's ecosystems are currently experiencing many shifts in their dynamics, losing out on vital activity within their systems. Some scholars have done considerable research into how to restore populations of megafauna in order to reinstate the stability once had in that ecosystem, such as in the case of Madagascar and giant tortoises. In this study, it was found that replacing one extinct megafauna with another that had a similar niche could prevent further extinctions among the islands species. Megaflora also contribute a huge amount to their ecosystems, offering shelter for many species and food for even more, including many megafauna.
GalleryPleistocene extinct megafaunaOther extinct Cenozoic megafaunaExtant


The following is a list of largest mammals by family.
Tenrecs and allies (Afrosoricida)
The largest of these insectivorous mammals is the giant otter shrew (Potamogale velox), native to Central Africa. This species can weigh up to 1 kilogram (2.2 lb) and measure 0.64 metres (2.1 ft) in total length.
The larger of the two species of bibymalagasy (Plesiorycteropus madagascariensis), extinct tenrec relatives from Madagascar, is estimated to have weighed from 10 to 18 kilograms (21 to 40 lb).
Even-toed ungulates (Artiodactyla)
The largest species in terms of weight is the hippopotamus (Hippopotamus amphibius), native to the rivers of sub-Saharan Africa. They can attain a size of 4,500 kg (9,900 lb), 5.05 m (16.6 ft) long and 1.66 m (5.4 ft) tall. Prehistoric hippos such as H. gorgops and H. antiquus rivaled or exceeded the modern species as the largest members of the family and order to ever exist.
The longest-bodied species, and tallest of all living land animals, is the giraffe (Giraffa sp.), measuring up to 5.8 m (19 ft) tall to the top of the head, and despite being relatively slender, reaching a top weight of 2,000 kg (4,400 lb).
The largest extant representative of the bovids, a diverse and well-known family, is the Asian forest-dwelling gaur (Bos gaurus), in which bulls can weigh up to  1,500 kg (3,300 lb), 4.5 m (15 ft) in total length and stand 2.2 m (7.2 ft) at the shoulder. The wild yak (B. mutus) reaches 2.05 m (6.7 ft) in height, and a weight of 1,200 kg (2,600 lb). The living American bison (B. bison) of North America is 2 to 3.5 m (6.6 to 11.5 ft) long, the tail adding 30 to 91 cm (12 to 36 in). Shoulder heights in the species can range from 152 to 201 cm (60 to 79 in). Weights can range from 318 to 1,270 kg (701 to 2,800 lb). The European bison (B. bonasus) may be less heavy than the American species, but would exceed heights at withers with the tallest record of 210 cm (83 in).  When raised in captivity and farmed for meat, the bisons can grow unnaturally heavy and the largest semidomestic American bison weighed 1,724 kg (3,801 lb)  and the heaviest European bison weighed about 1,900 kg (4,200 lb). The heads and forequarters of American species are massive, and both sexes have short, curved horns that can grow up to 2 ft (61 cm) long, which they use in fighting for status within the herd and for defense. Wild water buffaloes (Bubalus arnee) of Asia are larger and heavier than domestic buffaloes, and weigh from 700 to 1,200 kg (1,500 to 2,600 lb). Their head-to-body-length is 240 to 300 cm (94 to 118 in) with a tail 60 to 100 cm (24 to 39 in) long, and a shoulder height of 150 to 190 cm (59 to 75 in). Both sexes carry horns that are heavy at the base and widely spreading up to 2 m (79 in) The extinct giant bison (Bison latifrons) may be the largest bovid in the fossil record, with an estimated shoulder up to 2.5 m (8.2 ft) and a weight over 2,000 kg (4,400 lb). Pelorovis also reached 2,000 kg in weight. Domestic cattle (Bos taurus) are usually smaller, although obese steers have been reported to weigh up to 2,140 kg (4,720 lb). The largest antelope is the giant eland (Taurotragus derbianus) from Africa.  They are typically between 220 and 290 cm (7.2 and 9.5 ft) in head-and-body length, stand approximately 130 to 180 cm (4.3 to 5.9 ft) at the shoulder, and weigh 400 to 1,000 kg (880 to 2,200 lb).
The largest species in the pig family is generally the giant forest hog (Hylochoerus meinertzhageni), a native of the African rainforests, at up to 275 kg (606 lb), 2.55 m (8.4 ft) in length and 1.1 m (3.6 ft) high at the shoulder. Although wild boars (Sus scrofa) have reportedly reached 320 kg (710 lb) historically, especially the Manchurian subspecies (Sus scrofa ussuricus) and obese domestic pigs (S. domesticus) which have been weighed at 1,157 kg (2,551 lb). The largest wild suid to ever exist was Kubanochoerus gigas, having measured up to 550 kg (1,210 lb) and stood more than 1.3 m (4.3 ft) tall at the shoulder.
The largest living cervid is the moose (Alces alces), particularly the Alaskan subspecies (A. a. gigas), verified at up to 820 kg (1,810 lb), a total length of 3.5 m (11 ft) and a shoulder height of 2.4 m (7.9 ft). The largest deer of all time was C. latifrons estimated to have reached 2.1 m (6 ft 11 in) to 2.4 m (7 ft 10 in) high at the shoulder. With the body mass of C. latifrons was around 1,000 kg (2,200 lb). In some cases, this species could have weighed perhaps up to 1,200 kg (2,600 lb) with the largest specimens perhaps reaching  2.5 m (8.2 ft) at the shoulder. It, the extinct Irish elk (Megaloceros giganteus) and the stag-moose (Cervalces scotti) were of similar size to the Alaskan moose. However, the Irish elk could have antlers spanning up to 4.3 m (14 ft) across, about twice the maximum span for a moose's antlers.
The largest members of the camel family are either the bactrian camel (Camelus bactrianus), which is still wild in the steppe of central Asia, or the similarly sized dromedary (Camelus dromedarius), which no longer exists as a purely wild species but is widespread in the Middle East as a domestic animal, with a large introduced feral population in Australia. Both camels can weigh up to 1,000 kg (2,200 lb), 4 m (13 ft) in total length, 2.5 m (8.2 ft) tall at the shoulder and a height of 3.45 m (11.3 ft) at the hump. Several giant camels are known from fossils, the previous record holders, including Titanotylopus from North America, both possibly reached 2,485.6 kg (5,480 lb) and a shoulder height of over 3.4 m (11 ft). An extinct species of camel from Syria, also known as the "Syrian camel", may have been even larger, at an estimated shoulder height of 3.6 or even 4 m (12–13 ft).
Whales (Cetacea)
The largest whale (and largest mammal, as well as the largest animal known ever to have existed) is the blue whale, a baleen whale (Mysticeti). The longest confirmed specimen was 33.58 m (110.17 ft) in length and the heaviest was 190 tonnes. Its closest competitors are also baleen whales, the fin whale (Balaenoptera physalus), which can reach a size of 27 m (89 ft) in length and weight of 109 tonnes, and the bowhead (Balaena mysticetus) and North Pacific right whale (Eubalaena japonica), both measured up to 21.2 m (70 ft) and estimated at that length to weigh about 133 tonnes.
The largest toothed whale (Odontoceti) is the sperm whale (Physeter macrocephalus), bulls of which usually range up to 18.2 m (60 ft) long and a mass of 50 tonnes.
The orca or killer whale (Orcinus orca) is the largest species of the oceanic dolphin family. The largest orca ever recorded was a male off the coast of Japan, measuring 9.8 m (32 ft) long and weighed 10 tonnes.
The largest porpoise is the Dall's porpoise (Phocoenoides dalli), at up to 220 kg (490 lb) and 2.3 m (7.5 ft) in length.
The largest beaked whale is the Baird's beaked whale (Berardius bairdii) at up to 14 tonnes and 13 m (43 ft) long.
The largest of the beluga and narwhal is the beluga whale (Delphinapterus leucas).  Adult male beluga whales can range from 3.5 to 5.5 m (11 to 18 ft), while the females measure 3 to 4.1 m (9.8 to 13.5 ft).
The largest river dolphin is the Amazon river dolphin (Inia geoffrensis) from Amazon basin at a length of 1.53 to 2.4 m (5.0 to 7.9 ft), depending on subspecies. Females are typically larger than males. The largest female Amazon river dolphins can range up to 2.5 m (8.2 ft) long.
Fragmentary fossils of extinct rorquals from the Pliocene epoch suggest they rivaled the size of the largest whales today.
Perucetus, the largest Archaeoceti, has an estimated length exceeding 17.0–20.1 meters and weight ranging from 85–340 t which also rivaled the size of the largest whales today. However, a 2024 study proposed a much smaller size of 17 m to 20 m and 98-114t. With a 2025 study further downsizing it to 15m to 16m and 35-40t.
Carnivorans (Carnivora)
The largest carnivoran as well as the largest pinniped is the southern elephant seal (Mirounga leonina), attaining sizes up to 5,000 kg (11,000 lb) in weight and 6.9 m (23 ft) in length.
The largest living land carnivoran, on average, is the polar bear (Ursus maritimus). It can reach a shoulder height of over 1.6 m (5.2 ft) and total length of as much as 3.1 m (10 ft). The heaviest wild polar bear weight recorded was 1,002 kg (2,209 lb). The Kodiak bear, a brown bear (U. arctos) subspecies, rivals the polar bear in size, but is slightly smaller. It has a similar body length with the largest confirmed wild specimen weighing 751 kg (1,656 lb). The largest bear, and possibly the largest known mammalian land carnivore of all time, was Arctotherium angustidens. The largest specimen yet found is estimated to have weighed up to 1,600 kg (3,500 lb) and to have stood up to 3.39 m (11 ft 1 in) tall on the hind-limbs
The largest living species of the family Felidae is the tiger (Panthera tigris), with reports of males up to 388.7 and 465 kg (857 and 1,025 lb) in the wilderness and captivity, respectively. Captive ligers, hybrids between lions (P. leo) and tigers, can grow up to non-obese weights over 410 kg (900 lb).
Among the largest members of the family Felidae were the extinct American lion, averaging 256 kg (564 lb), the sabertooth Smilodon populator, of which the largest males might have exceeded 400 kg (880 lb), and sabertooths of genus Adeilosmilus (e.g., A. kabir), with an estimated mass of 350–490 kg (770–1,080 lb) and the Ngangdong tiger (Panthera tigris soloensis), estimated to have weighed up to 486 kg (1,071 lb)
In the wilderness, the largest living member of Canidae is the gray wolf (Canis lupus). The largest specimens from the Northwestern wolf (C. l. occidentalis) or the Eurasian wolf (C. l. lupus) weigh up to 80–86 kg (176–190 lb) and measure up to 2.5 m (8.2 ft) in total length and 0.97 m (3.2 ft) tall at the shoulder. Eurasian wolves from the Russian area have even been reported to weigh as much as 90–96 kg (198–212 lb), though these figures require verification. Domestic dogs however can occasionally grow heavier, up to 155.6 kg (343 lb).
The largest known canid is an extinct member of subfamily Borophaginae, Epicyon haydeni. The largest known specimen of this species weighed an estimated 170 kg (370 lb).
The largest and most diverse family of carnivores, the mustelids, reaches their maximum size (by mass) in the sea otter (Enhydra lutris) of the North Pacific coasts, at up to 54 kg (119 lb), and (by length) the giant otter (Pteronura brasiliensis) of the Amazonian rainforests, at up to 2.4 m (7.9 ft) in total. The largest mustelid to ever exist was likely the odd cat-like Ekorus from Africa, about the size of a modern leopard and filling a similar ecological niche before big cats came to the continent. Another contender for largest of this family is the wolverine-like Megalictis, which according to older estimates could have reached the size of a modern black bear. Newer estimates, however, significantly downgrade its size, although, at a maximum weight more than twice that of a wolverine, it is larger than most (if not all) living mustelids.
The largest species in the mongoose family is the African white-tailed mongoose (Ichneumia albicauda), at up to 6 kg (13 lb) and 1.18 m (3.9 ft) long.
The largest species in the viverrid family is the Asian binturong (Arctictis binturong), at up to 27 kg (60 lb) and 1.85 m (6.1 ft) long, about half of which is tail. The largest viverrid known to have existed is Viverra leakeyi, which was around the size of a modern wolf or small leopard at 41 kg (90 lb).
The largest modern species in the hyena family is the spotted hyena (Crocuta crocuta) of sub-Saharan Africa, at up to a maximum weight of 86–90 kg (190–198 lb). Spotted hyenas can range up to 2.13 m (7.0 ft) in total length and 93 cm (37 in) tall at the shoulder. The largest fossil hyena is the lion-sized Pachycrocuta, estimated at 200 kg (440 lb).
The largest living procyonid is the raccoon (Procyon lotor) of North America, having a body length of 40 to 70 cm (16 to 28 in) and a body weight of 3.5 to 9 kg (8 to 20 lb). The extinct Chapalmalania of South America was the largest known member of this family, about 1.5 metres (4.9 ft) in body length.
The largest skunk is generally considered the striped skunk, which can weigh up to 6.35 kg (14.0 lb) and reaches lengths of up to 70 cm (2.3 ft). The American hog-nosed skunk (Conepatus leuconotus) is longer, reaching lengths of up to 82.5 cm (2.71 ft), but is usually less heavy, at up to 10 pounds (4.5 kg).
Bats (Chiroptera)
The large flying fox (Pteropus vampyrus) is generally reported as the largest bat. Its wingspan has been verified to 1.83 m (6.0 ft) and may possibly reach 2 m (6.6 ft). In weight it is surpassed by the closely related Indian flying fox (P. medius), which is the heaviest bat at up to 1.6 kg (3.5 lb). A few other relatively poorly known species of flying foxes may match these, but few measurements are available.
The spectral bat (Vampyrum spectrum) of the Neotropics, at up to 95 g (3.4 oz), 14 cm (5.5 in) long and about 0.9 m (3.0 ft) in wingspan, is the largest member of the family Phyllostomidae and is also believed to be the largest member of the microbat suborder.
The great evening bat (Ia io), at 105 mm (4.1 in) long with an average wingspan of 0.51 m (20 in) and a weight of 58 g (2.0 oz), is the largest vesper bat.
Armadillos (Cingulata)
The largest of the armadillos is the giant armadillo (P. maximus). The top size for this species is 54 kg (119 lb), 0.55 m (1.8 ft) high at the shoulder and 1.6 m (5.2 ft) in length, although captive specimens can weigh up to 80 kg (180 lb).
Much larger prehistoric examples are known, especially Doedicurus of South America, which probably averaged around 2 tonnes, though one specimen may have weighed 2.3 tonnes, and could reach 3.6 m (12 ft) in total length and 1.53 m (5.0 ft) high at the top of the shelled back.
Colugos (Dermoptera)
Of the two colugo species in the order Dermoptera of gliding arboreal mammals in southeast Asia, the largest and most common is the Sunda flying lemur (Galeopterus variegatus). The maximum size is 2 kg (4.4 lb) and 73 cm (29 in) in length.
Hedgehogs and gymnures (Erinaceomorpha)
The largest of this order and family of prickly-skinned, small mammals is the greater moonrat (Echinosorex gymnura), native to the rainforests of the Malaysian Peninsula as well as Sumatra and Borneo. The maximum size of this species is over 2 kg (4.4 lb) and 60 cm (24 in). The moonrat is a member of the same family as hedgehogs, which are typically much smaller than the moonrat. Even larger was the giant gymnure Deinogalerix from Miocene Europe. It was estimated to grow larger than a modern house cat.
Hyraxes (Hyracoidea)
The largest species of hyrax seems to be the rock hyrax (Procavia capensis), at up to 5.4 kg (12 lb) and 73 cm (29 in) long. Prehistorically, the hyraxes were, for a time, the primary terrestrial herbivores in Africa, and some forms grew as large as modern horses. Genera such as Titanohyrax could reach 600 kg (1,300 lb) or even as much as over 1,300 kg (2,900 lb). With Megalohyrax from the upper Eocene-lower Oligocene reaching the size of a tapir.
Rabbits, hares, and pikas (Lagomorpha)
The largest extant wild species may be the European hare (Lepus europaeus), native to western and central Eurasia. This lagomorph can range up to 7 kg (15 lb) in weight and 0.85 m (2.8 ft) in total length. However, the Alaskan hare (Lepus othus) has almost the same exact body-proportions and weighs slightly more, averaging 4.8 kg (11 lb) and reaching a maximum mass of 7.2 kg (16 lb). Also, an occasional Arctic hare (L. arcticus) can also weigh as much as 7 kg (15 lb) but is typically smaller overall than the European and Alaskan species.
The largest pika species, the Chinese red pika (Ochotona erythrotis), reaches a body length of 29 centimetres (11 in).
The largest domestic rabbit breed is the Flemish Giant, which can attain a maximum known weight of 12.7 kg (28 lb).
The largest lagomorph ever was Nuralagus rex, native to Menorca, which could have possibly grow anywhere from 8 kg (18 lb)  to 23 kg (51 lb).
Elephant shrews (Macroscelidea)
The elephant shrews are named for their combination of long, trunk-like snouts and long legs combined with a general shrew-like body form, but these animals are in fact not closely related to any other extant order (including treeshrews) and are a unique group behaviorally and in appearance. The largest species is the recently discovered grey-faced sengi (Rhynchocyon udzungwensis), known only from the Udzungwa Mountains of Tanzania and Kenya. This elephant shrew can range up to 0.75 kg (1.7 lb) and a length of 0.6 m (2.0 ft).
Marsupials (Marsupialia)
The largest opossum is the Virginia opossum (Didelphis virginiana) from North America. Virginia opossums can vary considerably in size, with larger specimens found to the north of the opossum's range and smaller specimens in the tropics. They measure 13–37 inches (35–94 cm) long from their snout to the base of the tail, with the tail adding another 8.5–19 inches (21.6–47 cm). Weight for males ranges from 1.7 to 14 pounds (0.8–6.4 kg) and for females from 11 ounces to 8.2 pounds (0.3–3.7 kg).
The largest possum is the common brushtail possum (Trichosurus vulpecula) from Australia 32–58 cm with a tail length of 24–40 cm. It weighs 1.2-4.5 kg. Males are generally larger than females.
The largest peramelemorph, the long-nosed bandicoot (Perameles nasuta), reaches a body length of about 40 centimetres (16 in), including a tail of 14 centimetres (5.5 in), and weighs 1.5 kilograms (3.3 lb).
The red kangaroo (Osphanter rufus) of Australia is the largest living marsupial, and the largest member of the kangaroo family. These lanky mammals have been verified to 91 kg (201 lb) and 2.18 m (7.2 ft) when standing completely upright. Unconfirmed specimens have been reported up to 150 kg (330 lb). Prehistoric kangaroos reached even larger sizes. Procoptodon goliah was one of the largest known kangaroos that ever existed, standing approximately 2 m (6.6 ft) and weighing about 230 kg (510 lb). Some species from the genus Sthenurus were similar in size as well.
The northern hairy-nosed wombat (Lasiorhinus kreffti) is the largest vombatiform alive today with a head and body length up to 102 cm (40 in) and a weight of up to 40 kg (88 lb). Prehistorically, this suborder contained many huge marsupials, including the largest to ever exist: Diprotodon. This rhino-sized herbivore would have reached more than 3.3 m (11 ft) in length and stood 1.83 m (6.0 ft) at shoulder and was estimated to weigh up to 3,000 kg (6,600 lb).
The Tasmanian devil (Sarcophilus harrisii), endemic to Tasmania, is the largest living marsupial carnivore. These stocky mammals can range up to 14 kg (31 lb) and 1.1 m (3.6 ft) in total length. The recently extinct thylacine (Thylacinus cynocephalus), a close relative of the devil, grew larger and was the largest member of the group to survive into modern times. The largest measured specimen was 290 cm (9.5 ft) from nose to tail.
The largest carnivorous marsupials known to ever exist were the Australian marsupial lion (Thylacoleo carnifex) and the South American saber-toothed marsupial (Thylacosmilus) both ranging from 1.5 to 1.8 m (4.9 to 5.9 ft) long and weighing between 100 and 160 kg (220 and 350 lb). Neither were closely related to the true marsupial carnivores of today. Rather, the marsupial lion was most closely related to the herbivorous koalas, while Thylacosmilus was a member of the order Sparassodonta, a group which may not have even been true marsupials.
Monotremes (Monotremata)
The largest extant monotreme (egg-bearing mammal) is the western long-beaked echidna (Zaglossus bruijni) weighing up to 16.5 kg (36 lb) and measuring 1 m (3.3 ft) long. The largest monotreme ever was the extinct echidna species Murrayglossus hacketti, known only from a few bones found in Western Australia. It was about 1 m long and probably weighed about 30 kg (66 lb).
Odd-toed ungulates (Perissodactyla)
The largest extant species is the white rhinoceros (Ceratotherium simum). The largest size this species can attain is 4,500 kg (9,900 lb), 4.7 m (15 ft) in total length, and 1.85 m (6.1 ft) tall at the shoulder. It is slightly larger than the Indian rhinoceros (Rhinoceros unicornis), which can range up to a weight of 4,000 kg (8,800 lb). The extinct Elasmotherium sibricum was the largest rhino to ever exist. It stood approximately 2 m (6.6 ft) tall at the shoulder, up to 5 m (16 ft) long (excluding horn), and weighed from 3,000 to 5,000 kg (6,600 to 11,000 lb).
The largest extant wild equids are the Grevy's zebra (Equus grevyi), at up to 450 kg (990 lb), a shoulder height of 1.6 m (5.2 ft) and total length of 2.75 m (9.0 ft). Until it was domesticated into extinction the wild horse (E. ferus) was the largest equid. Domestic horses can reach a maximum weight of 1,524 kg (3,360 lb) and shoulder height of 2.2 m (7.2 ft), probably far greater than the sizes attained by the wild horse. The largest prehistoric horse was Equus giganteus of North America. It was estimated to grow around the same size as the aforementioned domestic horse.
The largest extant tapir is the Malayan tapir (Acrocodia indica), the only member of the family outside of South America. Maximum size is about 2.5 m (8.2 ft) in length, 1.2 m (3.9 ft) tall at the shoulder, and up to 540 kg (1,190 lb) in weight. The largest known  tapir is the Giant Tapir (Tapirus augustus) with a 2018 study estimating a body mass of approximately 623 kilograms (1,373 lb).
The second largest land mammal ever was Paraceratherium, a member of this order. The largest known species (Paraceratherium transouralicum) is believed to have stood up to 4.8 m (15.7 ft) tall at the shoulder, measured over 7.4 m (24.3 ft) long and may have weighed about 17 tonnes. Though an unnamed species of the related Dzungariotherium may have been slightly larger at 20.6 tonnes in weight, making it the largest paraceratheriid and a serious contender for the largest land mammal.
Pangolins (Pholidota)
The largest species is the giant pangolin (Manis gigantea), at up to 1.7 m (5.6 ft) and at least 40 kg (88 lb).
Anteaters and sloths (Pilosa)
The largest species is the giant anteater (Myrmecophaga tridactyla). A large adult can weigh as much as 65 kg (143 lb), be over 0.6 m (2.0 ft) tall at the shoulder and measure 2.4 m (7.9 ft) in overall length.

The largest living sloths are the Linnaeus's two-toed sloth (Choloepus didactylus) and Hoffmann's two-toed sloths (C. hoffmanni), which both can range up to 10 kg (22 lb) and 0.86 m (2.8 ft) long.
The sloths attained much larger sizes prehistorically, the largest of which were Megatherium which, at an estimated average weight of 4.5 tonnes and standing height of 5.1 m (17 ft), was about the same size as the African bush elephant
Primates (Primates)
The gorillas (Gorilla gorilla & G. beringei) are the most massive living primates. The largest race is eastern lowland gorilla (G. b. graueri), with males average 140–200 kg (310–440 lb), 1 m (3.3 ft) tall at the shoulder while on all fours and 1.65–1.75 m (5.4–5.7 ft) tall when standing. The tallest wild gorilla (from the mountain gorilla race, G. b. beringei) stood 1.95 m (6.4 ft) and the heaviest wild one massed 267 kg (589 lb), although heavier weights have been observed in captivity. The great apes of the genus Gigantopithecus, which lived in Asia between 1 million and 100,000 years ago, are the largest primates known to have existed. It was estimated to stand 3 m (9.8 ft) tall and to weigh up to 540 kg (1,190 lb). However this is disputed and may only have been half of that weight.
The largest of the Old World monkeys is the mandrill (Mandrillus sphinx) with large males being up to 50 kg (110 lb), 90 cm (3.0 ft) long and 50 cm (20 in) at the shoulders. The prehistoric baboon Dinopithecus grew even larger than modern mandrills, weighing as much as a grown man.
The largest New World monkey is the southern muriqui (Brachyteles arachnoides), up to 15 kg (33 lb) and 1.6 m (5.2 ft) in total length.
The largest lemur is the indri (Indri indri) which can weigh up to 12 kg (26 lb) and 90 cm (3.0 ft) in total length, though one fossil lemur, Archaeoindris, was gorilla-sized at 200 kg (440 lb).
Humans (Homo sapiens) can attain weights of up to 636 kg (1,402 lb) as well as heights of up to 2.72 m (8.9 ft), although these are cases of morbid obesity, tumor, gigantism or other medical malady. However, even when not afflicted with gigantism, humans are the tallest living primates. The largest man without growth abnormalities was 236 cm (7.74 ft) tall and weighed at least 230 kg (510 lb).
Elephants and allies (Proboscidea)
The African bush elephant, with a largest recorded weight of 10.4 tonnes, is the largest extant member of the order Proboscidea. Though various contenders vie for the title of largest proboscid ever, including the steppe mammoth (M. trogontherii) of Asia, the columbian mammoth (M. columbi) of North America, and Paleoloxodon recki of Africa (each of these species possibly reaching a shoulder height of 4.5 m (14.8 ft) and 14.3 tonnes in weight), the largest so far discovered species is believed to have been Palaeoloxodon namadicus. A recent estimate puts the largest individuals at a shoulder height of 5.2 m (17.1 ft) and a weight of about 22 tonnes. This would make it the largest land mammal known to ever exist, surpassing even Paraceratherium/Indricotherium. Though this estimate is highly speculative and the author of this estimate stated that it should be taken with "a grain of salt" as the material has been missing for nearly 200 years and is either stored in the Indian Museum of Kolkata or is lost. In 2023, a publication by Gregory S. Paul and Larramendi estimated that another specimen identified as cf. P. namadicus, also only known from a partial femur, would have weighed 18–19 tonnes (40,000–42,000 lb). Other authors have noted that weight estimates for proboscideans based on single bones can lead to estimates that are "highly improbable" compared to accurate estimates from complete skeletons.
Deinotherium "thraceiensis", at 4.01 metres (13.2 ft) tall and a weight of 13.2 tonnes (13.0 long tons; 14.6 short tons), rivaled those proboscideans in size, and was the largest member of its family (Deinotheriidae).
Rodents (Rodentia)
The largest living rodent is the capybara (Hydrochoerus hydrochaeris), native to most of the tropical and temperate parts of South America east of the Andes, always near water. Full-grown capybaras can reach 1.5 m (4.9 ft) long and 0.9 m (3.0 ft) tall at the shoulder and a maximum weight of 105.4 kg (232 lb). The extinct Neochoerus pinckneyi from North America, at 90 to 113 kg (200 to 250 pounds), was 40% larger than the living capybara.
The second largest living rodent is the North American beaver (Castor canadensis), which favors water perhaps even more than its larger cousin. Outsized male beaver specimens have been recorded up to 50 kg (110 lb), which is about twice the normal weight for a beaver, and 1.7 m (5.6 ft) in total length. The Eurasian beaver (C. fiber) is close to the same average size, but is known to top out around a mass of 31.7 kg (70 lb). The largest of this family is the extinct giant beaver of North America. It grew over 8 ft (2.4 m) in length and weighed roughly 60 to 100 kg (130 to 220 lb), also making it one of the largest rodents to ever exist.
The largest species in the squirrel family is the hoary marmot (Marmota caligata) of the Pacific Northwest, at up to 13.5 kg (30 lb) and 0.8 m (2.6 ft) long.
The largest porcupine is the Cape porcupine (Hystrix africaeaustralis) of Central Africa 63 to 81 centimetres (25 to 32 inches) long from the head to the base of the tail, with the tail adding a further 11–20 centimetres (4.3–7.9 inches). They weigh from 10 to 24 kilograms (22 to 53 pounds), with exceptionally large specimens weighing up to 30 kg (66 lb); males and females are not significantly different in size.
The largest hutia is Desmarest's hutia (Capromys pilorides) of Cuba 31–60 cm (12–24 in), a tail that is 14–29 cm (5.5–11.4 in) long, and weigh 2.8–8.5 kg (6.2–18.7 lb). The largest extinct blunt-toothed giant hutia to have weighed between 50 and 200 kg (110 and 440 lb).
The largest guinea pig, the greater guinea pig (Cavia magna), grows to a total length of 310 mm (12.2 in) and weight of 636 g (22.4 oz) for males and a total length of 303 mm (11.9 in) and weight of 537 g (18.9 oz) for females.
The largest muroid is the Gambian pouched rat of Africa. It grows up to 1 m (3.3 ft) in total length and can weigh up to 4 kg (8.8 lb).
The largest known rodent ever is Josephoartigasia monesi, an extinct species known only from fossils found in Uruguay. It was approximately 3 m (9.8 ft) long and 1.5 m (4.9 ft) tall, and is estimated to have weighed 1.5–2.5 tonnes. Prior to the description of J. monesi, the largest known rodent species were from the genus Phoberomys, of which two species have been discovered. An almost complete skeleton of the slightly smaller Late Miocene species, Phoberomys pattersoni, was discovered in Venezuela in 2000; it was approximately 3 m (9.8 ft) long, with an additional 1.5 m (4.9 ft) tail, and probably weighed around 700 kg (1,500 lb).
The largest dipodid is the great jerboa (Allactaga major), with a body length of 180 millimetres (7.1 in) and a tail of 260 millimetres (10 in).
Treeshrews (Scandentia)
The largest of the treeshrews seems to be the common treeshrew (Tupaia glis), at up to 187 g (6.6 oz) and 40 cm (16 in).
Dugongs and manatees (Sirenia)
The largest living species in the order Sirenia of dugongs and manatees is the West Indian manatee (Trichechus manatus). The largest manatees are found in the Florida subspecies. The maximum recorded size of this species was 1,655 kg (3,649 lb) and a total length of 4.6 m (15 ft).
The extinct Steller's sea cow (Hydrodamalis gigas) was the largest member to ever exist, growing up to at least 7.9 m (26 ft) long and weighing up to 11 tonnes. It was a member of the dugong family.
Shrews and moles (Soricomorpha)
The largest species of this order is the Hispaniolan solenodon (Solenodon paradoxus), males of which can weigh up to 1 kg (35.3 oz) and reach lengths of 32 cm (13 in).
The largest species of shrew, typically among the smallest-bodied of mammals, is the Asian house shrew (Suncus murinus), weighing up to 100 g (3.5 oz) and reach lengths of up to 16 cm (6.3 in).
The largest mole is the amphibious Russian desman (Desmana moschata), with a total length of up to 43 cm (1.41 ft) and an upper weight of 520 g (1.15 lb).
Aardvark (Tubulidentata)
The only species in this order is the unique aardvark (Orycteropus afer) of sub-Saharan Africa. Aardvarks are typically up to 1.3 m (4.3 ft) in length with an average weight of up to 65 kg (143 lb) and a shoulder height up to 0.65 m (2.1 ft). However, individuals as large as 2.2 m (7.2 ft) and as heavy as 100 kg (220 lb) are recorded.
Other mammals
An ancient relative of ungulates, Andrewsarchus, may have been the largest carnivorous land mammal ever, despite almost all living species being herbivorous. Known only from a 0.83 m (2.7 ft) skull found in Mongolia, about twice the length of a modern brown bear skull, this great beast has been estimated to range as high in size as 2 m (6.6 ft) at the shoulder and 4.5 m (15 ft) in length. Weight estimates range anywhere from 454 to 1,816 kg (1,000 to 4,000 lb.) based on the unknown proportion of the skull's size relative to the body size.
The largest member of the extinct order Cimolesta was probably Coryphodon, which was about 1 metre (3.3 ft) at shoulder height and 2.5 metres (8.2 ft) in body length and may have weighed up to 700 kg (1,500 lb) in the largest species.
The largest member of the extinct order Dinocerata (commonly known as Uintatheres) was Eobasileus. It was about 4 metres (13 ft) long and stood 2.1 metres (6.9 ft) tall at the shoulder, with a weight up to 4000 kg (8818 lbs).
The largest "creodont" was either Megistotherium or Sarkastodon. Both have had estimated weights of around 800 kg (1,800 lb), though more recent studies suggest they were more likely closer to 500 kg (1,100 lb). Both were among the largest predatory mammals of all time.
The largest member of the extinct Notoungulata, and the superorder Meridiungulata, was Toxodon. It was about 2.7 m (8 ft 10 in) in body length, with an estimated weight up to 1,415 kg (3,120 lb).
Taeniolabis taoensis is the largest non-therian mammal known, at a weight possibly exceeding 100 kg.
Patagomaia chainko is the largest Mesozoic mammal known. With Chimento et al. (2024) estimating it  to weigh between 2.6 and 26 kilograms (5.7 and 57.3 lb), with an average estimate of 14 kg (31 lb).


The reproductive system of an organism, also known as the genital system, is the biological system made up of all the anatomical organs involved in sexual reproduction and asexual reproduction.  Many non-living substances such as fluids, hormones, and pheromones are also important accessories to the reproductive system. Unlike most organ systems, the sexes of differentiated species often have significant differences. These differences allow for a combination of genetic material between two individuals, which allows for the possibility of greater genetic fitness of the offspring.
Animals
In mammals, the major organs of the reproductive system include the external genitalia (penis and vulva) as well as a number of internal organs, including the gamete-producing gonads (testicles and ovaries). Diseases of the human reproductive system are very common and widespread, particularly communicable sexually transmitted infections.
Most other vertebrates have similar reproductive systems consisting of gonads, ducts, and openings. However, there is a great diversity of physical adaptations as well as reproductive strategies in every group of vertebrates.
Vertebrates
Vertebrates share key elements of their reproductive systems. They all have gamete-producing organs known as gonads. In females, these gonads are then connected by oviducts to an external opening, typically the cloaca or vagina.
Humans
Human reproduction involves internal fertilization. During sexual intercourse, semen is ejaculated from the male's erect penis into the female's vagina. The male's sperm travel through the vagina and cervix into the uterus or fallopian tubes to fertilize the ovum. After fertilization and implantation, gestation of the fetus occurs in the uterus for about nine months, known as pregnancy, Pregnancy ends with childbirth, when uterine muscles contract, the cervix dilates, and the baby exits through the vagina. Human babies need prolonged parental care, including lactation from female mammary glands in the breasts.
The female reproductive system has two functions: The first is to produce egg cells, and the second is to protect and nourish the offspring until birth. The male reproductive system has one function, and it is to produce and deposit sperm. Humans have a high level of sexual differentiation. In addition to differences in nearly every reproductive organ, numerous differences typically occur in secondary sexual characteristics.
Male
The male reproductive system is a series of organs located outside of the body and around the pelvic region of a male that contribute towards the reproduction process. The primary direct function of the male reproductive system is to provide the male sperm for fertilization of the ovum.
The major reproductive organs of the male can be grouped into three categories. The first category is sperm production and storage. Production takes place in the testicles, which are housed in the temperature regulating scrotum, immature sperm then travel to the epididymides for development and storage. The second category is the ejaculatory fluid-producing glands which include the seminal vesicles, prostate, and the vasa deferentia. The final category are those used for copulation, and deposition of the spermatozoa (sperm) within the male, these include the penis, urethra, vas deferens, and Cowper's gland.
Major secondary sex characteristics include larger, more muscular stature, deepened voice, facial and body hair, broad shoulders, and development of an Adam's apple. An important sexual hormone of males is androgen, and particularly testosterone.
The testes release a hormone that controls the development of sperm. This hormone is also responsible for the development of physical characteristics in men such as facial hair and a deep voice.
Female
The human female reproductive system is a series of organs primarily located inside of the body and around the pelvic region of a female that contribute towards the reproductive process. The human female reproductive system contains three main parts: the vulva, which leads to the vagina, the vaginal opening, to the uterus; the uterus, which holds the developing fetus; and the ovaries, which produce the female's ova. The breasts are involved during the parenting stage of reproduction, but in most classifications they are not considered to be part of the female reproductive system.
The vagina meets the outside at the vulva, which also includes the labia, clitoris and urethra; during intercourse, this area is lubricated by mucus secreted by the Bartholin's glands. The vagina is attached to the uterus through the cervix, while the uterus is attached to the ovaries via the fallopian tubes. Each ovary contains hundreds of ova (singular ovum).
Approximately every 28 days, the pituitary gland releases a hormone that stimulates some of the ova to develop and grow. One ovum is released and it passes through the fallopian tube into the uterus. Hormones produced by the ovaries prepare the uterus to receive the ovum. The ovum will move through her fallopian tubes and awaits the sperm for fertilization to occur. When this does not occur, i.e. no sperm for fertilization,  the lining of the uterus, called the endometrium, and unfertilized ova are shed each cycle through the process of menstruation. If the ovum is fertilized by sperm, it will attach to the endometrium and embryonic development will begin.
Other mammals
Most mammal reproductive systems are similar, however, there are some notable differences between the non-human mammals and humans. For instance, most male mammals have a penis which is stored internally until erect, and most have a penis bone or baculum. Additionally, both males and females of most species do not remain continually sexually fertile as humans do and the females of most mammalian species don't grow permanent mammaries like human females do either. Like humans, most groups of mammals have descended testicles found within a scrotum, however, others have descended testicles that rest on the ventral body wall, and a few groups of mammals, such as elephants, have undescended testicles found deep within their body cavities near their kidneys.
The reproductive system of marsupials is unique in that the female has two vaginae, both of which open externally through one orifice but lead to different compartments within the uterus; males usually have a two-pronged penis, which corresponds to the females' two vaginae. Marsupials typically develop their offspring in an external pouch containing teats to which their newborn young (joeys) attach themselves for post uterine development. Also, marsupials have a unique prepenial scrotum. The 15 mm (5⁄8 in) long newborn joey instinctively crawls and wriggles the 15 cm (6 in), while clinging to fur, on the way to its mother's pouch.
In regards to males, the mammalian penis has a similar structure in reptiles and a small percentage of birds while the scrotum is only present in mammals. Regarding females, the vulva is unique to mammals with no homologue in birds, reptiles, amphibians, or fish. The clitoris, however, can be found in some reptiles and birds. In place of the uterus and vagina, non-mammal vertebrate groups have an unmodified oviduct leading directly to a cloaca, which is a shared exit-hole for gametes, urine, and feces. Monotremes (i.e. platypus and echidnas), a group of egg-laying mammals, also lack a uterus, vagina, and vulva, and in that respect have a reproductive system resembling that of a reptile.
Dogs
In domestic canines, sexual maturity (puberty) occurs between the ages of 6 and 12 months for both males and females, although this can be delayed until up to two years of age for some large breeds.
Horses
The mare's reproductive system is responsible for controlling gestation, birth, and lactation, as well as her estrous cycle and mating behavior. The stallion's reproductive system is responsible for his sexual behavior and secondary sex characteristics (such as a large crest).
Even-toed ungulatesBirds
Male and female birds have a cloaca, an opening through which eggs, sperm, and wastes pass. Intercourse is performed by pressing the lips of the cloacae together, which is sometimes known as an intromittent organ which is known as a phallus that is analogous to the mammals' penis. The female lays amniotic eggs in which the young fetus continues to develop after it leaves the female's body.  Unlike most vertebrates, female birds typically have only one functional ovary and oviduct. As a group, birds, like mammals, are noted for their high level of parental care.
Reptiles
Reptiles are almost all sexually dimorphic, and exhibit internal fertilization through the cloaca. Some reptiles lay eggs while others are ovoviviparous (animals that deliver live young). Reproductive organs are found within the cloaca of reptiles. Most male reptiles have copulatory organs, which are usually retracted or inverted and stored inside the body. In turtles and crocodilians, the male has a single median penis-like organ, while male snakes and lizards each possess a pair of penis-like organs.
Amphibians
Most amphibians exhibit external fertilization of eggs, typically within the water, though some amphibians such as caecilians have internal fertilization. All have paired, internal gonads, connected by ducts to the cloaca.
Fish
Fish exhibit a wide range of different reproductive strategies. Most fish, however, are oviparous and exhibit external fertilization. In this process, females use their cloaca to release large quantities of their gametes, called spawn into the water and one or more males release "milt", a white fluid containing many sperm over the unfertilized eggs. Other species of fish are oviparous and have internal fertilization aided by pelvic or anal fins that are modified into an intromittent organ analogous to the human penis. A small portion of fish species are either viviparous or ovoviviparous, and are collectively known as livebearers.
Fish gonads are typically pairs of either ovaries or testicles. Most fish are sexually dimorphic but some species are hermaphroditic or unisexual.
Invertebrates
Invertebrates have an extremely diverse array of reproductive systems, the only commonality may be that they all lay eggs. Also, aside from cephalopods and arthropods, nearly all other invertebrates exhibit external fertilization.
Cephalopods
All cephalopods are sexually dimorphic and reproduce by laying eggs. Most cephalopods have semi-internal fertilization, in which the male places his gametes inside the female's mantle cavity or pallial cavity to fertilize the ova found in the female's single ovary. Likewise, male cephalopods have only a single testicle. In the female of most cephalopods the nidamental glands aid in development of the egg.
The "penis" in most unshelled male cephalopods (Coleoidea) is a long and muscular end of the gonoduct used to transfer spermatophores to a modified arm called a hectocotylus. That in turn is used to transfer the spermatophores to the female. In species where the hectocotylus is missing, the "penis" is long and able to extend beyond the mantle cavity and transfer the spermatophores directly to the female.
Insects
Most insects reproduce oviparously, i.e. by laying eggs. The eggs are produced by the female in a pair of ovaries. Sperm, produced by the male in one testis or more commonly two, is transmitted to the female during mating by means of external genitalia. The sperm is stored within the female in one or more spermathecae. At the time of fertilization, the eggs travel along oviducts to be fertilized by the sperm and are then expelled from the body ("laid"), in most cases via an ovipositor.
Arachnids
Arachnids may have one or two gonads, which are located in the abdomen. The genital opening is usually located on the underside of the second abdominal segment. In most species, the male transfers sperm to the female in a package, or spermatophore. Complex courtship rituals have evolved in many arachnids to ensure the safe delivery of the sperm to the female.
Arachnids usually lay yolky eggs, which hatch into immatures that resemble adults. Scorpions, however, are either ovoviviparous or viviparous, depending on species, and bear live young.
Plants
Among all living organisms, flowers, which are the reproductive structures of angiosperms, are the most varied physically and show a correspondingly great diversity in methods of reproduction. Plants that are not flowering plants (green algae, mosses, liverworts, hornworts, ferns and gymnosperms such as conifers) also have complex interplays between morphological adaptation and environmental factors in their sexual reproduction. The breeding system, or how the sperm from one plant fertilizes the ovum of another, depends on the reproductive morphology, and is the single most important determinant of the genetic structure of nonclonal plant populations. Christian Konrad Sprengel (1793) studied the reproduction of flowering plants and for the first time it was understood that the pollination process involved both biotic and abiotic interactions.
Fungi
Fungal reproduction is complex, reflecting the differences in lifestyles and genetic makeup within this diverse kingdom of organisms. It is estimated that a third of all fungi reproduce using more than one method of propagation; for example, reproduction may occur in two well-differentiated stages within the life cycle of a species, the teleomorph and the anamorph. Environmental conditions trigger genetically determined developmental states that lead to the creation of specialized structures for sexual or asexual reproduction. These structures aid reproduction by efficiently dispersing spores or spore-containing propagules.


The Cenozoic Era (also known as the Caenozoic, Kainozoic, or Neozoic Era; ; SEE-nə-ZOH-ik, SEN-ə-; lit. 'new life') is Earth's current geological era, representing the last 66 million years of Earth's history. It is characterized by the dominance of  mammals, insects, birds and angiosperms (flowering plants). It is the latest of three geological eras of the Phanerozoic Eon, preceded by the Mesozoic and Paleozoic. The Cenozoic started with the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event, when many species, including the non-avian dinosaurs, became extinct in an event attributed by most experts to the impact of a large asteroid or other celestial body, the Chicxulub impactor.
The Cenozoic is commonly known as the Age of Mammals because the terrestrial animals that dominated both hemispheres were mammals – the eutherians (placentals) in the Northern Hemisphere and the metatherians (marsupials, now mainly restricted to Australia and to some extent South America) in the Southern Hemisphere. The extinction of many groups allowed mammals and birds to greatly diversify so that large mammals and birds dominated life on Earth. The continents also moved into their current positions during this era.
The climate during the early Cenozoic was warmer than today, particularly during the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum. However, the Eocene to Oligocene transition and the Quaternary glaciation dried and cooled Earth.
Nomenclature
Cenozoic derives from the Ancient Greek words kainós (καινός, 'new') and zōḗ (ζωή, 'life'). The name was proposed in 1840 by the British geologist John Phillips (1800–1874), who originally spelled it Kainozoic. The era is also known as the Cænozoic, Caenozoic, or Cainozoic ().
In name, the Cenozoic (lit. 'new life') is comparable to the preceding Mesozoic ('middle life') and Paleozoic ('old life') Eras, as well as to the Proterozoic ('earlier life') Eon.
Divisions
The Cenozoic is divided into three periods: the Paleogene, Neogene, and Quaternary; and seven epochs: the Paleocene, Eocene, Oligocene, Miocene, Pliocene, Pleistocene, and Holocene. The Quaternary Period was officially recognised by the International Commission on Stratigraphy in June 2009. In 2004, the Tertiary Period was officially replaced by the Paleogene and Neogene Periods. The common use of epochs during the Cenozoic helps palaeontologists better organise and group the many significant events that occurred during this comparatively short interval of time. Knowledge of this era is more detailed than any other era because of the relatively young, well-preserved rocks associated with it.
Paleogene
The Paleogene spans from the extinction of non-avian dinosaurs, 66 million years ago, to the dawn of the Neogene, 23.03 million years ago. It features three epochs: the Paleocene, Eocene and Oligocene.
The Paleocene Epoch lasted from 66 million to 56 million years ago. Modern placental mammals originated during this time. The devastation of the K–Pg extinction event included the extinction of large herbivores, which permitted the spread of dense but usually species-poor forests. The Early Paleocene saw the recovery of Earth. The continents began to take their modern shape, but all the continents and the subcontinent of India were separated from each other. Afro-Eurasia was separated by the Tethys Sea, and the Americas were separated by the strait of Panama, as the isthmus had not yet formed. This epoch featured a general warming trend, with jungles eventually reaching the poles. The oceans were dominated by sharks as the large reptiles that had once predominated were extinct. Archaic mammals filled the world such as creodonts (extinct carnivores, unrelated to existing Carnivora).
The Eocene Epoch ranged from 56 million years to 33.9 million years ago. In the Early-Eocene, species living in dense forest were unable to evolve into larger forms, as in the Paleocene. Among them were early primates, whales and horses along with many other early forms of mammals. At the top of the food chains were huge birds, such as Paracrax. Carbon dioxide levels were approximately 1,400 ppm. The temperature was 30 degrees Celsius with little temperature gradient from pole to pole. In the Mid-Eocene, the Antarctic Circumpolar Current between Australia and Antarctica formed. This disrupted ocean currents worldwide and as a result caused a global cooling effect, shrinking the jungles. This allowed mammals to grow to mammoth proportions, such as whales which, by that time, had become almost fully aquatic. Mammals like Andrewsarchus were at the top of the food-chain. The Late Eocene saw the rebirth of seasons, which caused the expansion of savanna-like areas, along with the evolution of grasses. The end of the Eocene was marked by the Eocene–Oligocene extinction event, the European face of which is known as the Grande Coupure.
The Oligocene spans from 33.9 million to 23.03 million years ago. The Oligocene featured the expansion of grasslands which had led to many new species to evolve, including the first elephants, cats, dogs, marsupials and many other species still prevalent today. Many other species of plants evolved in this period too. A cooling period featuring seasonal rains was still in effect. Mammals still continued to grow larger and larger.
Neogene
The Neogene spans from 23.03 million to 2.58 million years ago.  It features two epochs: the Miocene, and the Pliocene.
The Miocene Epoch spans from 23.03 to 5.333 million years ago and is a period in which grasses spread further, dominating a large portion of the world, at the expense of forests. Kelp forests evolved, encouraging the evolution of new species, such as sea otters. During this time, Perissodactyla thrived, and evolved into many different varieties. Apes evolved into 30 species. The Tethys Sea finally closed with the creation of the Arabian Peninsula, leaving only remnants as the Black, Red, Mediterranean and Caspian Seas. This increased aridity. Many new plants evolved: 95% of modern seed plants families were present by the end of the Miocene.
The Pliocene Epoch lasted from 5.333 to 2.58 million years ago. The Pliocene featured dramatic climatic changes, which ultimately led to modern species of flora and fauna. The Mediterranean Sea dried up for several million years (because the ice ages reduced sea levels, disconnecting the Atlantic from the Mediterranean, and evaporation rates exceeded inflow from rivers). Australopithecus evolved in Africa, beginning the human branch. The Isthmus of Panama formed, and animals migrated between North and South America during the great American interchange, wreaking havoc on local ecologies. Climatic changes brought: savannas that are still continuing to spread across the world; Indian monsoons; deserts in central Asia; and the beginnings of the Sahara desert. The world map has not changed much since, save for changes brought about by the glaciations of the Quaternary, such as the Great Lakes, Hudson Bay, and the Baltic Sea.
Quaternary
The Quaternary spans from 2.58 million years ago to present day, and is the shortest geological period in the Phanerozoic Eon. It features modern animals, and dramatic changes in the climate. It is divided into two epochs: the Pleistocene and the Holocene.

The Pleistocene lasted from 2.58 million to 11,700 years ago. This epoch was marked by ice ages as a result of the cooling trend that started in the Mid-Eocene. There were at least four separate glaciation periods marked by the advance of ice caps as far south as 40° N in mountainous areas. Meanwhile, Africa experienced a trend of desiccation which resulted in the creation of the Sahara, Namib, and Kalahari deserts. Many animals evolved including mammoths, giant ground sloths, dire wolves, sabre-toothed cats, and Homo sapiens. 100,000 years ago marked the end of one of the worst droughts in Africa, and led to the expansion of primitive humans. As the Pleistocene drew to a close, a major extinction wiped out much of the world's megafauna, including some of the hominid species, such as Neanderthals. All the continents were affected, but Africa to a lesser extent. It still retains many large animals, such as hippos.
The Holocene began 11,700 years ago and lasts to the present day. All recorded history and "the Human history" lies within the boundaries of the Holocene Epoch. Human activity is blamed for a mass extinction that began roughly 10,000 years ago, though the species becoming extinct have only been recorded since the Industrial Revolution. This is sometimes referred to as the "Sixth Extinction". It is often cited that over 322 recorded species have become extinct due to human activity since the Industrial Revolution, but the rate may be as high as 500 vertebrate species alone, the majority of which have occurred after 1900.
Tectonics
Geologically, the Cenozoic is the era when the continents moved into their current positions. Australia-New Guinea, having split from Pangea during the early Cretaceous, drifted north and, eventually, collided with Southeast Asia; Antarctica moved into its current position over the South Pole; the Atlantic Ocean widened and, later in the era (2.8 million years ago), South America became attached to North America with the isthmus of Panama.
India collided with Asia 55 to 45 million years ago creating the Himalayas; Arabia collided with Eurasia, closing the Tethys Ocean and creating the Zagros Mountains, around 35 million years ago.
The break-up of Gondwana in Late Cretaceous and Cenozoic times led to a shift in the river courses of various large African rivers including the Congo, Niger, Nile, Orange, Limpopo and Zambezi.
Climate
In the Cretaceous, the climate was hot and humid with lush forests at the poles, there was no permanent ice and sea levels were around 300 metres higher than today. This continued for the first 10 million years of the Paleocene, culminating in the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum about 55.5 million years ago.
Around 50 million years ago, Earth entered a period of long term cooling. This was mainly due to the collision of India with Eurasia, which caused the rise of the Himalayas: the upraised rocks eroded and reacted with CO2 in the air, causing a long-term reduction in the proportion of this greenhouse gas in the atmosphere. Around 35 million years ago, permanent ice began to build up on Antarctica. The cooling trend continued in the Miocene, with relatively short warmer periods. When South America became attached to North America creating the Isthmus of Panama around 2.8 million years ago, the Arctic region cooled due to the strengthening of the Humboldt and Gulf Stream currents, eventually leading to the glaciations of the Quaternary ice age, the current interglacial of which is the Holocene Epoch.
Recent analysis of the geomagnetic reversal frequency, oxygen isotope record, and tectonic plate subduction rate, which are indicators of the changes in the heat flux at the core mantle boundary, climate and plate tectonic activity, shows that all these changes indicate similar rhythms on million years' timescale in the Cenozoic Era occurring with the common fundamental periodicity of ~13 Myr during most of the time. The levels of carbonate ions in the ocean fell over the course of the Cenozoic.
Life
Early in the Cenozoic, following the K-Pg event, the planet was dominated by relatively small fauna, including small mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians. From a geological perspective, it did not take long for mammals to greatly diversify in the absence of the dinosaurs that had dominated during the Mesozoic. Birds also diversified rapidly; some flightless birds grew larger than humans. These species are sometimes referred to as "terror birds", and were formidable predators. Mammals came to occupy almost every available niche (both marine and terrestrial), and some also grew very large, attaining sizes not seen in most of today's terrestrial mammals. The ranges of many Cenozoic bird clades were governed by latitude and temperature and have contracted over the course of this era as the world cooled.
During the Cenozoic, mammals proliferated from a few small, simple, generalised forms into a diverse collection of terrestrial, marine, and flying animals, giving this period its other name, the Age of Mammals. The Cenozoic is just as much the age of savannas, the age of co-dependent flowering plants and insects, and the age of birds. Grasses also played a very important role in this era, shaping the evolution of the birds and mammals that fed on them.  One group that diversified significantly in the Cenozoic as well were the snakes. Evolving in the Cenozoic, the variety of snakes increased tremendously, resulting in many colubrids, following the evolution of their current primary prey source, the rodents.
In the earlier part of the Cenozoic, the world was dominated by the gastornithid birds, terrestrial crocodylians like Pristichampsus, large sharks such as Otodus, and a handful of primitive large mammal groups like uintatheres, mesonychians, and pantodonts. But as the forests began to recede and the climate began to cool, other mammals took over.
The Cenozoic is full of mammals both strange and familiar, including chalicotheres, creodonts, whales, primates, entelodonts, sabre-toothed cats, mastodons and mammoths, three-toed horses, giant rhinoceros like Paraceratherium, the rhinoceros-like brontotheres, various bizarre groups of mammals from South America, such as the vaguely elephant-like pyrotheres and the dog-like marsupial relatives called borhyaenids and the monotremes and marsupials of Australia. Mammal evolution in the Cenozoic was predominantly shaped by climatic and geological processes.
Cenozoic calcareous nannoplankton experienced rapid rates of speciation and reduced species longevity, while suffering prolonged declines in diversity during the Eocene and Neogene. Diatoms, in contrast, experienced major diversification over the Eocene, especially at high latitudes, as the world's oceans cooled. Diatom diversification was particularly concentrated at the Eocene-Oligocene boundary. A second major pulse of diatom diversification occurred over the course of the Middle and Late Miocene.


March Mammal Madness is an alternate March Madness tournament focusing on simulated combat between organisms of all kinds, despite the name. Katie Hinde created March Mammal Madness, using a 64-animal bracket, with the goal of using biological research to create (simulated) battles.
Katie Hinde, originally an assistant professor in the Department of Human Evolutionary Biology at Harvard University and currently an associate professor in the School of Human Evolution and Social Change at Arizona State University, later brought in three other educators to help her organize the event. This includes assistant professor at Boston University School of Medicine Kristi Lewton, a lecturer at State University of New York Joshua Drew, and assistant professor at Dominican University Christopher Anderson. Along with these educators, a team of artists led by Charon Henning provides artwork of the various mammal competitors throughout the tournament. Together, they research all of the combatants, using what they learned to provide entertainment and information.
In 2017, more educators were added on to the March Mammal Madness team to help. This includes Ph.D. student at the University of Notre Dame Mauna Dasari, postdoctoral fellow at the University of Notre Dame Marc Kissel, post-doctoral researcher and instructor at the University of Utah Patrice Kurnath genetics, genomics, and the phylogeny of the various mammals participating. This includes Anne Stone of the School of Human Evolution and Social Change, and Melissa Wilson Sayres from the School of Life Sciences at Arizona State University.
Bracket
The bracket itself is modeled after the NCAA championship, including an Elite Eight and a Final Four. The bracket is divided into four divisions, which change yearly. The 64 animals are chosen and put into the various divisions based on their characteristics. In the 2015 bracket, the chosen divisions were Mighty Mini Mammals, Mythical Mammals, Critically Endangered Mammals, and Sexy Beasts. Mammals such as the dwarf mongoose and the Java mouse-deer were chosen for the Mighty Mini Mammals, while legendary beasts such as Ratatoskr and the Yeti battled it out in the Mythical Mammals. The mammals compete against others in their division, eventually working their way down to the Final Four (one from each division), and finally the championship.
Battles
The battles are decided by a mix of scientific research and chance. Katie Hinde and the March Mammal Madness organizing team do in-depth research on the contestants. Temperament, diet, social behavior, environment, size, and fight style are just a few of the factors taken into consideration. After these factors are weighed against each other, the team determines probability of one animal defeating another. This is how they develop the seed, or rank, of each animal. Then a 100 sided die is rolled with a determined percentage numbers attributed to each animal. This adds an element of chance, since in sport nothing is guaranteed. Additionally, the environment in which the encounter takes place can be a major factor in the outcome. For the first few rounds, each fight takes place in the environment of the higher seeded animal. After the Sweet Sixteen, it is chosen at random and announced immediately prior to the encounter.
Combining research with an element of chance has led to some major upsets, just like in real life. In round one of the 2015 Mighty Mini Mammal division, the 14th-seeded numbat defeated the 3rd-seed quokka. The research is then used to create a narrative to explain the loss. The narratives can range from a serious battle, to humorous happenstance. In 2014, research showed the pangolin to be the most trafficked animal on the planet. Before the match even began, the pangolin was captured by poachers and shipped away, forfeiting the fight. Each round has a scheduled day and time, found on Arizona State's March Mammal Madness blog.
Instead of just announcing the winners, the written narratives are live-tweeted as if the match was happening in real time. Fans can follow along and tweet back using the designated March Mammal Madness hashtag, creating a fun and exciting atmosphere where people can learn about the animals they support. The creators use a combination of gamification, social media, and narrative in an attempt to make scientific research more accessible. As of 2019, approximately 1100 scholarly works have been represented by March Mammal Madness, which reached about 1% of all high school students in the United States.
In 2017, the wildcard match was performed as a live-action movie to celebrate the fifth anniversary of the tournament. The wildcard match was also done with four mammal competitors instead of the usual two. Members of the March Mammal Madness team dressed up as the competing mammals and acted out the battle in front of a green screen. The battle was then edited together and the final video was tweeted out during the first day of the 2017 March Mammal Madness season.
In 2018, brief summaries of the battles in the style of sports reporting were added, providing for a short recap of each encounter.
Past battle outcomes
All past battle outcomes and play by plays of the battles can be found on the March Mammal Madness Archives.
All tables begin with round two, after the first elimination. The animals' seed number is in parentheses (after round 2 only). If no animals advanced the cell is grey, if the animal was the champion the cell is gold.
2013
Divisions: Carnivores, Primates, Grazers and Browsers, and Hodge Podge

Animals which did not advance to round two: ferret, wolverine, leopard, meerkat, coyote, fennec fox, Tasmanian devil, island fox, dik-dik, camel, wildebeest, gerenuk, reindeer, gazelle, giraffe, duiker, shrew, anteater, wombat, ground squirrel, capybara, sugar glider, red panda, tenrec, naked mole rat, dusky titi monkey, rhesus macaque, lemur catta, bush baby, capuchin, tamarin, red colobus, marmoset
2014
Divisions: Social Mammals, Marine Mammals, Who in the What Now, and Fossil Mammals

Animals which did not advance to round two: titi monkey, dingo, meerkat, beaver, marmot, bush dog, hyrax, bandicoot, fisher, saki monkey, Sunda colugo, pangolin, echidna, olinguito, mara, A. afarensis, A. sediba, dire wolf, aurochs, giant giraffid, megalania, rhino wombat, giant baboon, Godzilla platypus, sea otter, beluga whale, harbor seal, river dolphin, hooded seal, ringed seal, narwhal, manatee
2015
Divisions: Mighty Minis, Critically Endangered, Mythical Mammals, and Sexy Beasts

Animals which did not advance to round two: jerboa, bumblebee bat, tent-making bat, pygmy mouse lemur, least weasel, pygmy possum, quokka, social tuco-tuco, dormouse, Kanko, Pegasus, Pooka, Ichneumon, Water Horse, Greek Sphinx, Kishi, Colo Colo, yellow-bellied marmot, bighorn sheep, olive baboon, vervet monkey, bongo, koala, Irish elk, European hare, silver pika, black dorcopsis, cloud rat, Siau Island tarsier, Javan slow loris, riverine rabbit, saola, Sibree's dwarf lemur
2016
Divisions: Cold-Adapted Mammals, Mighty Giants, Mammal Mascots, and Mammals of the Nouns. For the mascot mammal bracket, the university and the mammal the mascot represents are linked separately.

Mammals who did not advance to round two: lemming, snow monkey, caribou, snowshoe hare, Antarctic fur seal, stoat, vicuña, Siberian chipmunk, Haverford black squirrel, Schoolcraft College ocelots, Santa Clara bronco, Penn State mountain lions, Lethbridge pronghorn, Naval Academy goat, Texas A&M javelina, Yale bulldog, Thor's hero shrew, giant cloud rat, giant elephant shrew, giant otter shrew, greater dwarf lemur, giant armadillo, giant flying squirrel, giant mole rat, shrew of the water, viscacha of the mountain, rabbit of the volcano, pocket gopher of the mountain, dog of the prairie, baby of the bush, cat of the sand, vole of the bank
2017
Divisions: Adjective Mammals, Coulda Shoulda, Desert Adapted, and Two Animals One Mammal

Animals which did not advance to round two: snow leopard, fisher, rhesus macaque, sac-winged bat, long-tailed pangolin, burrowing bettong, hairy-nosed wombat, bat-eared fox, red squirrel, brown-throated sloth, silky anteater, southern marsupial mole, meerkat, patas monkey, marbled polecat, bilby, long-eared hedgehog, sand cat, jerboa, giant red flying squirrel, lion, leopard, fossil baboon, dire wolf, giant armadillo, Irish elk, quokka, shrew mole, raccoon dog, otter civet, kangaroo rat, mouse opossum, deer mouse, squirrel monkey, grasshopper mouse
2018
Divisions: Antecessors, Great Adaptations, When the Kat's Away, and Urban Jungle

Animals which did not advance to round two: Jugulator, Thalassocnus, Procoptodon, Nuralagus rex, Archaeoindris, Aegyptopithecus, Palaeoloxodon, Deinogalerix, star-nosed mole, platypus, solenodon, ghost bat, desman, edible dormouse, coatimundi, fat-tailed dunnart, goldcrest, praying mantis, Bothrops asper, horseshoe crab, alligator snapping turtle, beaded lizard, giant salamander, cookiecutter shark, tardigrade, Belo Horizonte marmoset, raccoon, Moscow dog, opossum, striped skunk, eastern gray squirrel, Delhi rhesus, hedgehog
Alt Advance
In 2018, the tardigrade advanced several rounds without winning. In the When the Kat's Away division, the anaconda didn't see it, but was the official winner. The tardigrade continued to ride each winning animal, thus becoming an "alt-champion".
2019
Divisions: Jump Jump, Waterfalls, Tag Team, and CAT-e-Gory

Animals which did not advance to round two: tiger beetle, ringtail cat, jackrabbit, serval, stoat, klipspringer, spinifex hopping mouse, sifaka, markhor, bulldog bat, water chevrotain, mink, white-lipped peccary, crab-eating fox, water opossum, marine otter, vontsira, batfly & gammaproteobacteria, Goeldi's monkey & saddleback tamarin & white-lipped tamarin, clownfish & sea anemone, fire coral & algae, Bornean bat & pitcher plant, burying beetles & phoretic mites, fork-tailed drongo & sociable weaver, ants & aphids, antlion, stonecat, panther chameleon, tiger salamander, cat snake, leopard frog, green catbird, dandelion
2020
Divisions: Tiny Terrors, Double Trouble, Cat-ish vs. Dog-ish, and AnthropoSCENE

Animals which did not advance to round two: Grandidier's mongoose, spotted linsang, falanouc, greater grison, kinkajou, Caspian seal, giant forest genet, solongoi, pygmy spotted skunk, kowari, collared pika, gray-bellied caenolestid, least chipmunk, bank vole, northern short-tailed shrew, Seba's short-tailed bat, southern ningaui, feral pigeon, chinchilla, little brown bat, face mite, bogue, monarch butterfly, honeybee, chytrid, lynx, zokor, green iguana, harbor porpoise, filarial nematode, acorn barnacle, long-legged bat, amoeba
2021
Divisions: Tricksy Taxonomy, Red in Fur, Of Myth and Monsters, and Sea Beasties

Animals which did not advance to round two: colo colo opossum, aoudad, Kinda baboon, Malagasy striped civet, Amami rabbit, common treeshrew, mara, red wolf, southern red-backed vole, Hopi chipmunk, red & white giant flying squirrel, Siberian weasel, little red flying fox, ring-tailed vontsira, red-necked pademelon, red squirrel, Goliath beetle, thorny devil, fire salamander, flying dragon lizard, black & red bush squirrel, white-winged vampire bat, Brussels Griffon, Masrasector nananubis, planktonic copepod, lathe acteon (snail), basket star, blue glaucus, demon eartheater cichlid, tube anemone, Aphrodite anthias, Hydra
2022
Divisions: Mammal Collectives, Wild North America, Queens of the Sea and Sky, and Why Not Both?

Animals which did not advance to round two: labor of moles, town of prairie dogs, herd of reindeer, prickle of hedgehogs, troop of monkeys, romp of otters, glaring of cats, skulk of foxes, Mexican free-tailed bat, southern bog lemming, 13-lined ground squirrel, marsh rabbit, kit fox, yellow-bellied marmot, coyote, badger, Mexican free-tailed bat, Florida bonneted bat, common prawn, Iberian ribbed newt, northern jacana, macaroni penguin, dobsonfly, Arctic tern, anglerfish, hagfish, lichen, leaf slug, lungfish, painted redstart, New Zealand lesser short-tailed bat, scansoriopterygid, hairy frog, muntjac
2023
Divisions: Mighty Stripes, Itty Bitty Comeback City, Animal Engineers, and Dad Bods

Animals which did not advance to round two: four-striped grass mouse, striped polecat, striped possum, chequered elephant shrew, wildcat, fire-footed rope squirrel, numbat, badger bat, shrew mole, bumblebee bat, southern ningaui, silver pika, Siberian chipmunk, silky anteater, colo colo opossum, Thor's hero shrew, pygmy jerboa, spongilla fly, veined octopus, trapdoor spider, tent-making bat, rufous hornero, bee, Montezuma oropendola, dung beetle, lined seahorse, Caspian tern, peacock wrasse, Darwin's frog, spotted sandpiper, giant water bug, greater flamingo, three-spined stickleback
2024
Divisions: Epic Animals, Rainbow Collection, Connoisseur Critters, and Take a Bow

Animals which did not advance to round two: albatross, bigeye houndshark, Indian grey mongoose, starling, mouse, catfish, Tarzan chameleon, schizomid, golden-headed lion tamarin, Himalayan monal, mandarin fish, Bornean rainbow toad, Madagascan sunset moth, flat lizard, rainbow scarab, sparklemuffin peacock spider, rainbow grasshopper, koala, fork-marked lemur, hairy-legged bee, northern short-tailed shrew, Wichita Mountains pillsnail, velvet worm, parasitic guest ant, bear's head, forest elephant, howler monkey, coral snake, hognose snake, wrinkle-faced bat, singing mouse, elegant dancing frog, Asian cornborer moth
2025
Animals which did not advance to round two: Olympic marmot, grey kangaroo, mouse deer, fig-eating bat, bandicoot, hedgehog, greater glider, northern flying squirrel, Grant's golden mole, tayra, muskrat, mountain beaver, marsh mongoose, star-nosed mole, hispid hare, woolly giant rat, Eurasian water shrew, Delacour's langur, giant cloud rat, moonrat, tamandua, eastern spotted skunk, white-faced capuchin, zorilla, mycorrhizal fungus*, platypus, olm, mudskipper, pelican, cyanobacteria, starry sturgeon, fern
*#1 seed ginkgo and #16 rhizo merged to become "ginkgo & rhizo" who made the Final Roar
2026


The cat (Felis catus), also called domestic cat and house cat, is a small domesticated carnivorous mammal. It is a member of Felidae, the family of mammals in the order Carnivora also colloquially referred to as cats. It is an obligate carnivore, requiring a predominantly meat-based diet. Its retractable claws are adapted to killing small prey species such as mice and rats. It has a strong, flexible body, quick reflexes, and sharp teeth, and its night vision and sense of smell are well developed. It is a social species, but a solitary hunter and a crepuscular predator.
Cat communication includes meowing, purring, trilling, hissing, growling, grunting, body language, and scent marking. It can hear sounds too faint or too high in frequency for human ears, such as those made by small mammals. It secretes and perceives pheromones. Cat intelligence is evident in its ability to adapt, learn through observation, and solve problems. The domestic cat is the only domesticated species of the family Felidae.
Advances in archaeology and genetics have shown that the domestication of the cat started in the Near East around 7500 BCE. Today, the domestic cat occurs across the globe and is valued by humans for companionship and its ability to kill vermin. It is commonly kept as a pet, working cat, and pedigreed cat shown at cat fancy events. Out of the estimated 600 million domestic cats worldwide, 400 million reside in Asia, including 58 million in China. About 73.8 million cats are estimated to live in the United States, and about 10.9 million cats in the United Kingdom. It also ranges freely as a feral cat, avoiding human contact. Pet abandonment contributes to increasing of the global feral cat population, which has driven the decline of bird, mammal, and reptile species. Population control includes spaying and neutering.
Etymology and naming
The origin of the English word cat, Old English catt, is thought to be the Late Latin word cattus, which was first used at the beginning of the 6th century. The Late Latin word may be derived from an unidentified African language. The Nubian word kaddîska 'wildcat' and Nobiin kadīs are possible sources or cognates.
The forms might also have derived from an ancient Germanic word that was absorbed into Latin and then into Greek, Syriac, and Arabic. The word may be derived from Germanic and Northern European languages, and ultimately be borrowed from Uralic, cf. Northern Sámi gáđfi 'female stoat', and Hungarian hölgy 'lady, female stoat'; from Proto-Uralic *käďwä 'female (of a furred animal)'.
The English puss, extended as pussy and pussycat, is attested from the 16th century and may have been introduced from Dutch poes or from Low German puuskatte, related to Swedish kattepus, or Norwegian pus, pusekatt. Similar forms exist in Lithuanian puižė and Irish puisín or puiscín. The etymology is unknown, but it may be an onomatopoeia from using a sound to attract a cat.
A male cat is called a tom, tommy or tomcat (or a gib, if neutered). A female is called a queen (or sometimes a molly, if spayed). Some sources write that queen refers solely to unspayed cats that are in an estrous cycle. A juvenile cat is referred to as a kitten (also shortened to kitty), a term interchangeable with the now-obsolete word catling in Early Modern English. A group of cats can be referred to as a clowder, a glaring, or a colony.
Taxonomy
The scientific name Felis catus was proposed by Carl Linnaeus in 1758 for a domestic cat. Felis catus domesticus was proposed by Johann Christian Polycarp Erxleben in 1777. Felis daemon proposed by Konstantin Satunin in 1904 was a black cat from the Transcaucasus, later identified as a domestic cat.
In 2003, the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature conserved the name silvestris Erxleben 1777 for the wildcat, but did not suppress catus Linnaeus 1758. In 2007, the modern domesticated subspecies F. silvestris catus was sampled worldwide and considered to have probably descended from the African wildcat (F. lybica), following results of phylogenetic research. In 2017, the IUCN Cat Classification Taskforce, following the recommendation of Gentry et al. (2004) that names based on domestic forms be used for domestic derivatives of wild species, regarded the domestic cat as a distinct species, Felis catus.
Evolution
The domestic cat is a member of the Felidae, a family that has a common ancestor from about 10 to 15 million years ago. The evolutionary radiation of the Felidae began in Asia during the Miocene around 8.38 to 14.45 million years ago. Analysis of mitochondrial DNA of all Felidae species indicates a radiation at 6.46 to 16.76 million years ago. The genus Felis genetically diverged from other Felidae around 6 to 7 million years ago. Results of phylogenetic research shows that the wild members of this genus evolved through sympatric or parapatric speciation, whereas the domestic cat evolved through artificial selection.
The genome sequence of the domestic cat was first published in 2007 and is available at the National Center for Biotechnology Information. The domestic cat and its closest wild ancestor both possess 19 chromosome pairs and roughly 20,000 genes. The cat genome sequence has been used for various purposes, including the study of cat migration patterns and disease.
Domestication
It was long thought that the domestication of the cat began in ancient Egypt, where cats were venerated from around 3100 BCE. However, the earliest known indication for the taming of an African wildcat was excavated close by a human Neolithic grave in Shillourokambos, southern Cyprus, dating to about 7500–7200 BCE. Since there is no evidence of native mammalian fauna on Cyprus, the inhabitants of this village most likely brought the cat and other wild mammals to the island from the West Asian mainland. Scientists therefore assume that African wildcats were attracted to early human settlements in the Fertile Crescent by rodents, in particular the house mouse (Mus musculus), and were tamed by Neolithic farmers. This mutual relationship between early farmers and tamed cats lasted thousands of years. As agricultural practices spread, so did tame and domesticated cats. Wildcats of Egypt contributed to the maternal gene pool of the domestic cat at a later time.
The earliest known evidence for the occurrence of the domestic cat in Greece dates to around 1200 BCE. Greek, Phoenician, Carthaginian and Etruscan traders introduced it to southern Europe. By the 5th century BCE, it was a familiar animal around settlements in Magna Graecia and Etruria. During the Roman Empire, it was introduced to Corsica and Sardinia. By the end of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century, the Egyptian domestic cat lineage had arrived in a Baltic Sea port in northern Germany.
The leopard cat (Prionailurus bengalensis) was tamed independently in China around 5500 BCE. This line of a partially domesticated cat left no trace in the domestic cat populations of today.
During domestication, cats have undergone only minor changes in anatomy and behavior, and they are still capable of surviving in the wild. Several natural behaviors and characteristics of wildcats may have pre-adapted them for domestication as pets. These traits include their small size, social nature, obvious body language, love of play, and high intelligence. Their rigorous grooming habits and instinct to bury their bodily waste make them generally much less messy than other domesticated animals. Captive Leopardus cats may also display affectionate behavior toward humans but are not domesticated. House cats may mate with feral cats.
The development of cat breeds started in the mid-19th century. An analysis of the domestic cat genome revealed that the ancestral wildcat genome was significantly altered in the process of domestication, as specific mutations were selected to develop cat breeds. Most breeds are founded on random-bred domestic cats; genetic diversity of these breeds varies between regions, and is lowest in purebred populations, which show more than 20 deleterious genetic disorders.
Hybridization between domestic and other Felinae species is also possible, producing hybrids such as the Kellas cat in Scotland.
CharacteristicsSize
The domestic cat has a smaller skull and shorter bones than the European wildcat. It averages about 46 cm (18 in) in head-to-body length and 23–25 cm (9.1–9.8 in) in height, with about 30 cm (12 in) long tails. Males are larger than females. Adult domestic cats typically weigh 4–5 kg (8.8–11.0 lb).
Skeleton
Cats have seven cervical vertebrae (as do most mammals); 13 thoracic vertebrae (humans have 12); seven lumbar vertebrae (humans have five); three sacral vertebrae (as do most mammals, but humans have five); and a variable number of caudal vertebrae in the tail (humans have only three to five vestigial caudal vertebrae, fused into an internal coccyx). The extra lumbar and thoracic vertebrae account for the cat's spinal mobility and flexibility. Attached to the spine are 13 ribs, the shoulder, and the pelvis. Unlike human arms, cat forelimbs are attached to the shoulder by free-floating clavicle bones which allow them to pass their body through any space into which they can fit their head.
Skull
The cat skull is unusual among mammals in having very large eye sockets and a powerful specialized jaw. Two long canine teeth for killing and tearing prey can stab between two of the prey's vertebrae and sever its spinal cord, causing paralysis and death. Compared to other felines, domestic cats have narrowly spaced canine teeth relative to the size of their jaw, which is an adaptation to their preferred prey of small rodents, which have small vertebrae.
The premolar and first molar together compose the carnassial pair on each side of the mouth, which efficiently shears meat into small pieces, like a pair of scissors. These are vital in feeding, because cats' small molars cannot chew food effectively, and cats are largely incapable of mastication. Cats tend to have better dental health than most humans, with decay generally less likely because of a thicker protective layer of enamel, a less damaging saliva, less retention of food particles between teeth, and a diet mostly devoid of sugar. Nonetheless, they are subject to occasional tooth loss and infection.
Claws
Cats have protractible and retractable claws. In their normal, relaxed position, the claws are sheathed with the skin and fur around the paw's toe pads. This keeps the claws sharp by preventing wear from contact with the ground and allows for the silent stalking of prey. The claws on the forefeet are typically sharper than those on the hindfeet. Cats can voluntarily extend their claws, such as in hunting, fighting, climbing, kneading, or for extra traction on soft surfaces. Cats shed the outside layer of their claw sheaths when scratching rough surfaces.
Most cats have five claws on their front paws and four on their rear paws. The dewclaw is proximal to the other claws. More proximally is a protrusion which appears to be a sixth "finger". This special feature of the front paws on the inside of the wrists has no function in normal walking but is thought to be an antiskidding device used while jumping. Some cat breeds are prone to having extra digits ("polydactyly").
Ambulation
The cat is digitigrade. It walks on the toes, with the bones of the feet making up the lower part of the visible leg. Unlike most mammals, it uses a "pacing" gait that alternates both legs together on each side. It registers directly by placing each hind paw close to the track of the corresponding fore paw, minimizing noise and visible tracks. This also provides sure footing for hind paws when navigating rough terrain. As it speeds up from walking to trotting, its gait changes to a "diagonal" gait: The diagonally opposite hind and fore legs move simultaneously.
Balance
Cats are generally fond of perching in high places. This may be a concealed hunting site such as a tree branch, for domestic cats to pounce upon prey. They favor a superior observation point over territory. A cat falling from up to 3 m (9.8 ft) can right itself and land on its paws.
During a lofty fall, a cat reflexively twists and rights itself to land on its feet using its acute sense of balance and flexibility. This reflex is known as the cat righting reflex. A cat always rights itself in the same way, and it has enough time in falls of at least 90 cm (3.0 ft). This has been investigated as the "falling cat problem".
Coats
The domestic cat genes MC1R and ASIP allow color variety in the coat. The feline ASIP gene consists of three coding exons. Three novel microsatellite markers linked to ASIP were isolated from a domestic cat BAC clone containing this gene to perform linkage analysis on 89 domestic cats segregated for melanism. The domestic cat family demonstrated a cosegregation between the ASIP allele and black coloration of the coat.
Diet
The cat is an obligate carnivore and has adapted to a low-fibre highly digestible meat diet. Cats have fewer enzymes capable of metabolising carbohydrates compared to omnivores. The cat lacks the ability to convert carotenoids to vitamin A; has an inability to synthesise enough vitamin D; inability to synthesise niacin from tryptophan; inability to synthesise cysteine, citrulline, and methionine; lacks glucokinase activity; and an intolerance to glutamic acid (which is low in animal tissue and high in plant matter). Taurine and arginine are essential for cats. Due to the inability to synthesise adequate amounts of citrulline a single meal lacking in arginine can be fatal to a cat. Cats cannot produce enough taurine and require dietary taurine; a lack of taurine will cause a cat to develop dilated cardiomyopathy. Commercial cat diets historically were lacking in taurine and dilated cardiomyopathy was a common issue until it was linked to taurine deficiency in a 1987 study.
SensesVision
Cats have excellent night vision and can see at one sixth the light level required for human vision. This is partly the result of cat eyes having a tapetum lucidum, which reflects any light that passes through the retina back into the eye, thereby increasing the eye's sensitivity to dim light. Large pupils are an adaptation to dim light. The domestic cat has slit pupils, which allow it to focus bright light without chromatic aberration. At low light, a cat's pupils expand to cover most of the exposed surface of its eyes. The domestic cat has rather poor color vision and only two types of cone cells, optimized for sensitivity to blue and yellowish green; its ability to distinguish between red and green is limited. A response to middle wavelengths from a system other than the rod cells might be due to a third type of cone. This appears to be an adaptation to low light levels rather than representing true trichromatic vision. Cats have a nictitating membrane, allowing them to blink without hindering their vision.
Hearing
The domestic cat's hearing is most acute in the range of 500 Hz to 32 kHz. It can detect an extremely broad range of frequencies ranging from 55 Hz to 79 kHz, whereas humans can only detect frequencies between 20 Hz and 20 kHz. It can hear a range of 10.5 octaves, compared to about 9 octaves for humans and dogs. Its hearing sensitivity is enhanced by its large movable outer ears, the pinnae, which amplify sounds and help detect the location of a noise. It can detect ultrasound, including ultrasonic calls from rodent prey. Research has shown that cats have socio-spatial cognitive abilities to create mental maps of familiar people's locations based on hearing their voices.
Smell
Cats have an acute sense of smell, due in part to their well-developed olfactory bulb and a large surface of olfactory mucosa, about 5.8 cm2 (0.90 in2) in area, which is about twice that of humans. Cats and many other animals have a Jacobson's organ in their mouths that is used in the behavioral process of flehmening. It allows them to sense certain aromas in a way that humans cannot. Cats are sensitive to pheromones such as 3-mercapto-3-methylbutan-1-ol, which they use to communicate through urine spraying and marking with scent glands. Many cats also respond strongly to plants that contain nepetalactone, especially catnip, which they can detect at less than one part per billion. About 70–80% of cats are affected by nepetalactone. This response is also produced by other plants, such as silver vine (Actinidia polygama) and the herb valerian; it may be caused by the smell of these plants mimicking a pheromone and stimulating cats' social or sexual behaviors.
Taste
Cats have about 470 taste buds, compared to more than 9,000 on the human tongue. Domestic and wild cats share a taste receptor gene mutation that keeps their sweet taste buds from binding to sugary molecules, leaving them with no ability to taste sweetness. But they do have taste bud receptors specialized for acids, amino acids such as the constituents of protein, and bitter tastes.
Cats' taste buds possess the receptors needed to detect umami. However, these receptors contain molecular changes that make them taste umami differently from humans. In humans, they detect the amino acids glutamic acid and aspartic acid; but in cats, they instead detect inosine monophosphate and histidine. These molecules are particularly enriched in tuna. Researchers argue why cats find tuna so palatable: "the specific combination of the high IMP and free histidine contents of tuna, which produces a strong umami taste synergy that is highly preferred by cats." One researcher said, "I think umami is as important for cats as sweet is for humans."
Cats distinctly prefer food temperature around 38 °C (100 °F), similar to a fresh kill. Some cats reject cold food, which would signal to the cat that the prey is long dead and therefore possibly toxic or decomposing.
Whiskers
To aid with navigation and sensation, cats have dozens of movable whiskers (vibrissae) over their body, most prominently on their faces, as seen by the long, white lines diverging outwards from its nose. These provide information on the width of gaps and on the location of objects in the dark, both by touching objects directly and by sensing air currents. They trigger protective blink reflexes to protect the eyes from damage.
Behavior
Outdoor cats are active both day and night, although they tend to be slightly more active at night. Domestic cats spend the majority of their time in the vicinity of their homes, but they can range a radius of many hundreds of meters. They establish territories that vary considerably in size, in one study ranging 7–28 ha (17–69 acres). The timing of cats' activity is quite flexible and varied; but being low-light predators, they are generally crepuscular, which means they tend to be more active near dawn and dusk. However, house cats' behavior is also influenced by human activity, and they may adapt to their owners' sleeping patterns to some extent.
Cats conserve energy by sleeping more than most animals, especially as they grow older. The daily duration of sleep varies, usually between 12 and 16 hours, with 13 to 14 being the average. Some cats can sleep as much as 20 hours. The term "cat nap" for a short rest refers to the cat's tendency to fall asleep (lightly) for a brief period. Short periods of rapid eye movement sleep are often accompanied by muscle twitches, which suggests they are dreaming.
Behavioral and personality traits depend on a complex interplay between genetic and environmental factors. Scientific evidence does not support the popular belief that those traits are linked to coat colors.
Sociability
The social behavior of the domestic cat ranges from widely dispersed individuals to feral cat colonies that gather around a food source, based on groups of co-operating females. Within such groups, one cat is usually dominant over the others. Each cat in a colony holds a distinct territory, with sexually active males having the largest territories, which are about 10 times larger than those of female cats and may overlap with several females' territories. These territories are marked by urine spraying, rubbing objects at head height with secretions from facial glands, and by defecation. Between these territories are neutral areas where cats watch and greet one another without territorial conflicts. Outside these neutral areas, territory holders usually chase away stranger cats, at first by staring, hissing, and growling, and, if that does not work, by short and violent, noisy attacks. Because cats do not have a social survival strategy or herd behavior, they always hunt alone.

Life in proximity to humans and other domestic animals has led to a symbiotic social adaptation in cats, and cats may express great affection toward humans or other animals. Ethologically, a cat's human keeper functions as a mother surrogate. Adult cats live in a type of extended kittenhood, a form of behavioral neoteny. Their high-pitched sounds may mimic the cries of a hungry human infant, making them particularly difficult for humans to ignore. Some pet cats are poorly socialized. In particular, older cats may show aggressiveness toward newly arrived kittens, which includes biting and scratching; this type of behavior is known as feline asocial aggression.
Redirected aggression is a common form of aggression that can occur in multiple cat households. In redirected aggression, a cat is usually agitated by a stimulus such as a sight, sound, or other trigger that causes heightened anxiety or arousal; if the cat cannot attack the original stimulus, it may redirect its aggression toward the nearest cat, pet, human, or other being.
Domestic cats' scent rubbing behavior toward humans or other cats is thought to be a feline means of social bonding.
Communication
Domestic cats use many vocalizations for communication, including purring, trilling, hissing, growling/snarling, grunting, and several different forms of meowing. Their body language, including position of ears and tail, relaxation of the whole body, and kneading of the paws, are all indicators of mood. The tail and ears are particularly important social signal mechanisms; a raised tail indicates a friendly greeting, and flattened ears indicate hostility. Tail-raising also indicates the cat's position in the group's social hierarchy, with dominant individuals raising their tails less often than subordinate ones. Feral cats are generally silent. Nose-to-nose touching is also a common greeting and may be followed by social grooming, which is solicited by one of the cats raising and tilting its head.
Purring may have developed as an evolutionary advantage as a signaling mechanism of reassurance between mother cats and nursing kittens, who are thought to use it as a care-soliciting signal. Post-nursing cats also often purr as a sign of contentment: when being petted, becoming relaxed, or eating. Although purring is popularly interpreted as indicative of pleasure, it has been recorded in a wide variety of circumstances, most of which involve physical contact between the cat and another, presumably trusted individual. Some cats have been observed to purr continuously when chronically ill or in apparent pain.
The exact mechanism by which cats purr has long been elusive, but it has been proposed that purring is generated via a series of sudden build-ups and releases of pressure as the glottis is opened and closed, which causes the vocal folds to separate forcefully. The laryngeal muscles in control of the glottis are thought to be driven by a neural oscillator which generates a cycle of contraction and release every 30–40 milliseconds (giving a frequency of 33 to 25 Hz).
Domestic cats observed in rescue facilities have 276 morphologically distinct facial expressions based on 26 facial movements; each facial expression corresponds to different social functions that are probably influenced by domestication. Facial expressions have helped researchers detect pain in cats. The feline grimace scale's five criteria—ear position, orbital tightening, muzzle tension, whisker change, and head position—indicated the presence of acute pain in cats.
Grooming
Cats are known for spending considerable amounts of time licking their coats to keep them clean. The cat's tongue has backward-facing spines about 0.5 mm (0.020 in) long, called filiform papillae, which contain keratin making them rigid. The papillae act like a hairbrush, and some cats, particularly long-haired cats, occasionally regurgitate sausage-shaped 2–3 cm (0.8–1.2 in) long hairballs of fur that have collected in their stomachs from grooming. Hairballs can be prevented with remedies that ease elimination of the hair through the gut, and regular grooming of the coat with a comb or stiff brush.
Cat intelligence
Cat intelligence refers to a cat's ability to solve problems, adapt to its environment, learn new behaviors, and communicate its needs. Structurally, a cat's brain shares similarities with the human brain, containing around 250 million neurons in the cerebral cortex, which is responsible for complex processing. Cats display neuroplasticity allowing their brains to reorganize based on experiences. They have well-developed memory retaining information for a decade or longer. These memories are often intertwined with emotions, allowing cats to recall both positive and negative experiences associated with specific places. While they excel in observational learning and problem-solving, studies conclude that they struggle with understanding cause-and-effect relationships in the same way that humans do.
Cat intelligence study is mostly from consideration of the domesticated cat. Living in urban environments has exposed it to challenges that require adaptive behaviors, contributing to cognitive development. Selective breeding and genetic changes have further influenced its intelligence. Kittens learn essential survival skills by observing their mothers, while adult cats refine their abilities through trial and error.
Play
Domestic cats, especially young kittens, are known for their love of play. This behavior mimics hunting and is important in helping kittens learn to stalk, capture, and kill prey. Cats also engage in play fighting, both with each other and with humans. This behavior may be a way for cats to practice the skills needed for real combat, and it might also reduce the fear that they associate with launching attacks on other animals.
Cats also tend to play with toys more when they are hungry. Owing to the close similarity between play and hunting, cats prefer to play with objects that resemble prey, such as small furry toys that move rapidly, but rapidly lose interest. They become habituated to a toy they have played with before. String is often used as a toy, but if it is eaten, it can become caught at the base of the cat's tongue and then move into the intestines, a medical emergency which can cause serious illness, even death.
Hunting and feeding
The shape and structure of cats' cheeks is insufficient to allow them to take in liquids using suction. Lapping at a rate of four times a second, the cat touches the smooth tip of its tongue to the surface of the water, and quickly retracts it like a corkscrew, drawing water upward into their mouths.
Feral cats and free-fed house cats consume several small meals in a day. The frequency and size of meals varies between individuals. They select food based on its temperature, smell, and texture; they dislike chilled foods and respond most strongly to moist foods rich in amino acids, which are similar to meat. Cats reject novel flavors (a response termed neophobia) and learn quickly to avoid foods that have tasted unpleasant in the past. It is also a common misconception that all cats like milk or cream, as they tend to avoid sweet food and milk. Most adult cats are lactose intolerant; the sugar in milk is not easily digested and may cause soft stools or diarrhea. Some also develop odd eating habits and like to eat or chew on things such as wool, plastic, cables, paper, string, aluminum foil, or even coal. This condition, pica, can threaten their health, depending on the amount and toxicity of the items eaten.
Cats hunt small prey, primarily birds and rodents, and are often used as a form of pest control. Other common small creatures, such as lizards, snakes and insects, may also become prey. Cats use two hunting strategies, either stalking prey actively, or waiting in ambush until a prey animal comes close enough to be captured. The strategy used depends on available prey, with cats waiting in ambush outside burrows, but tending to actively stalk birds. Domestic cats are a major predators of wildlife in the United States, killing an estimated 1.3 to 4.0 billion birds and 6.3 to 22.3 billion mammals annually.
Certain species appear more susceptible than others; in one English village, for example, 30% of house sparrow mortality was linked to the domestic cat. In the recovery of ringed robins (Erithacus rubecula) and dunnocks (Prunella modularis) in Britain, 31% of deaths were a result of cat predation. In parts of North America, the presence of larger carnivores such as coyotes, which prey on cats and other small predators, reduces the effect of predation by cats and other small predators such as opossums and raccoons on bird numbers and variety.
Another poorly understood element of cat hunting behavior is the presentation of prey to human guardians. One explanation is that cats adopt humans into their social group and share excess kill with others in the group according to the dominance hierarchy, in which humans are reacted to as if they are at or near the top. Another explanation is that they attempt to teach their guardians to hunt or to help their human as if feeding "an elderly cat, or an inept kitten". This hypothesis is inconsistent with the fact that male cats also bring home prey, though males have negligible involvement in raising kittens.
Fighting
Domestic males are more likely to fight than females. The most common reason for feral cat fighting is competition between two males to mate with a female, and most fights are won by the heavier male. Another common reason for fighting in domestic cats is the difficulty of establishing territories within a small home. Female cats also fight over territory or to defend their kittens. Neutering decreases or eliminates this behavior in many cases, suggesting that the behavior is linked to sex hormones.
When cats become aggressive, they try to appear larger and more threatening by raising their fur, arching their backs, turning sideways, hissing, or spitting. Often, the ears are pointed down and back to avoid damage to the inner ear and potentially listen for any changes behind them while focused forward. Cats may also vocalize loudly and bare their teeth in an effort to further intimidate their opponents. Fights usually consist of grappling, slapping the face and body with the forepaws, and bites. Cats throw themselves to the ground in a defensive posture to rake their opponent's belly with their hind legs.
Serious damage is rare, because the fights are usually short, with the loser fleeing with scratches to the face and ears. More severe fights for mating rights may give deep punctures and lacerations. Normally, serious injuries from fighting are limited to infections from scratches and bites. Bites are probably the main route of transmission of the feline immunodeficiency virus. Sexually active males are usually involved in many fights and have battered faces; to protect against facial injuries during fights, intact adult male cats often develop prominent cheeks due to the influence of testosterone as secondary sex characteristics, which also signal to females that the cat is a potential mate. Cats often threaten animals larger than them to defend their territory, such as dogs and foxes.
Reproduction
The cat secretes and perceives pheromones. Female cats, called queens, are polyestrous with several estrus cycles during a year, lasting usually 21 days. They are usually ready to mate between early February and August in northern temperate zones and throughout the year in equatorial regions.
Several males, called tomcats, are attracted to a female in heat. They fight over her, and the victor wins the right to mate. At first, the female rejects the male, but eventually, the female allows the male to mate. The female utters a loud yowl as the male pulls out of her because a male cat's penis has a band of about 120–150 backward-pointing penile spines, which are about 1 mm (0.04 in) long; upon withdrawal of the penis, the spines may provide the female with increased sexual stimulation, which acts to induce ovulation.

After mating, the female cleans her vulva thoroughly. If a male attempts to mate with her at this point, the female attacks him. After about 20 to 30 minutes, once the female is finished grooming, the cycle will repeat. Because ovulation is not always triggered by a single mating, females may not be impregnated by the first male with which they mate. Furthermore, cats are superfecund; that is, a female may mate with more than one male when she is in heat, with the result that different kittens in a litter may have different fathers.
The morula forms 124 hours after conception. At 148 hours, early blastocysts form. At 10–12 days, implantation occurs. The gestation of queens lasts between 64 and 67 days, with an average of 65 days.

Based on a study of 2,300 free-ranging queens conducted from May 1998 and October 2000, they had one to six kittens per litter, with an average of three kittens. They produced a mean of 1.4 litters per year, but a maximum of three litters in a year. Of 169 kittens, 127 died before they were six months old due to a trauma caused in most cases by dog attacks and road accidents. The first litter is usually smaller than subsequent litters. Kittens are weaned between six and seven weeks of age. Queens normally reach sexual maturity at 5–10 months, and males at 5–7 months. This varies depending on breed. Kittens reach puberty at the age of 9–10 months.
Cats are ready to go to new homes at about 12 weeks of age, when they are ready to leave their mother. They can be surgically sterilized (spayed or castrated) as early as seven weeks to limit unwanted reproduction. This surgery also prevents undesirable sex-related behavior, such as aggression, territory marking (spraying urine) in males, and yowling (calling) in females. Traditionally, this surgery was performed at around six to nine months of age, but it is increasingly being performed before puberty, at about three to six months. In the United States, about 80% of household cats are neutered.
Lifespan and health
The average lifespan of pet cats has risen in recent decades. In the early 1980s, it was about 7 years, rising to 9.4 years in 1995 and an average of about 13 years as of 2014 and 2023.
Neutering increases life expectancy; one 2024 study found neutered cats to live one year longer than entire cats. Having a cat neutered confers some health benefits, such as a decreased incidence of reproductive neoplasia. However, neutering decreases metabolism and increases food intake, both of which can cause obesity in neutered cats. Pre-pubertal neutering (neutering at 4 months or earlier) was only recommended by 28% of American veterinarians in one study. Some concerns of early neutering were metabolic, retarded physeal closure, and urinary tract disease related.
Disease
About 250 heritable genetic disorders have been identified in cats; many are similar to human inborn errors of metabolism. The high level of similarity among the metabolism of mammals allows many of these feline diseases to be diagnosed using genetic tests that were originally developed for use in humans, as well as the use of cats as animal models in the study of the human diseases. Diseases affecting domestic cats include acute infections, parasitic infestations, injuries, and chronic diseases such as kidney disease, hyperthyroidism, and arthritis. Vaccinations are available for many infectious diseases, as are treatments to eliminate parasites such as worms, ticks, and fleas.
Health issues
Between 50% and 90% of cats experience dental or gum problems, but these can be prevented by maintaining the cat's oral hygiene using products specifically designed for cats, which are not toxic for them.
Accidental poisoning in cats is common and can result from several sources: plants that are toxic to cats, medications not intended for cats, foods unsuitable for cats, and household substances such as pesticides and household cleaners. Plants toxic to cats include lilies, tulips, and philodendrons; medication poisoning occurs when cats ingest drugs intended for human, such as acetaminophen and aspirin, as well as vitamin capsules, flea treatments designed for dogs, and foods dangerous to cats like grapes, onions, garlic, and chocolate.
Cat owners' attitudes and knowledge affects how they care for their cats, and people with greater knowledge about cats are less likely to use positive punishment, i.e. causing an unpleasant stimulus to the cat.
Several organizations have published guidelines for the proper and safe care of cats. The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals has published a general guide emphasizing proper cat care, which covers appropriate nutrition and needs for fresh and clean water, coat care, litter box maintenance, regular veterinary care.
The American Association of Feline Practitioners and the International Society of Feline Medicine released a guide on environmental needs of cats.
Professional organizations have emphasized the importance of environmental enrichment for cats, and some authors have raised concerns that many cat owners do not provide sufficient environmental enrichment. In an online survey of cat owners, only about half of the respondents reported playing with their cats daily.
Guidelines have also been published for veterinarians and caregivers to improve the welfare of cats under their care, including recommendations for cat-friendly interactions in veterinary clinics.
The guide focuses on five main aspects: providing a safe private space for the cat (e.g., a cardboard box on its side, placed in a high location, and in sufficient numbers if multiple cats are present); offering multiple environmental resources (several feeding stations, resting areas and litter boxes, and separating food from water); opportunities for play and activities that simulate hunting behavior (using appropriate toys and puzzle feeders); positive, consistent, and predictable social interaction (acclimating the cat to frequent contact from an early age, speaking softly, and avoiding forced contact); and an environment that allows the cat to use its sense of smell normally (providing scratching posts and other items where it can leave its scent, and avoiding strong odors throughout the home).
EcologyHabitats
The domestic cat is a cosmopolitan species and occurs across much of the world. It is adaptable and now present on all continents except Antarctica, and on 118 of the 131 main groups of islands, even on the remote Kerguelen Islands. Due to its ability to thrive in almost any terrestrial habitat, it is among the world's most invasive species. It lives on small islands with no human inhabitants. Feral cats can live in forests, grasslands, tundra, coastal areas, agricultural land, scrublands, urban areas, and wetlands.
The unwantedness that leads to the domestic cat being treated as an invasive species is twofold. As it is little altered from the wildcat, it can readily interbreed with the wildcat. This hybridization poses a danger to the genetic distinctiveness of some wildcat populations, particularly in Scotland and Hungary, possibly also the Iberian Peninsula, and where protected natural areas are close to human-dominated landscapes, such as Kruger National Park in South Africa. However, its introduction to places where no native felines are present also contributes to the decline of native species.
Ferality
Feral cats are domestic cats that were born in or have reverted to a wild state. They are unfamiliar with and wary of humans and roam freely in urban and rural areas. The numbers of feral cats are not known, but estimates of the United States feral population range from 25 to 60 million. Feral cats may live alone, but most are in large colonies, which occupy a specific territory and are usually associated with a source of food. Famous feral cat colonies are in Rome around the Colosseum and Forum Romanum, some being fed and given medical attention by volunteers.
Public attitudes toward feral cats vary widely, from seeing them as free-ranging pets to regarding them as vermin.
Impact on wildlife
Domestic cats are a contributing factor to the decline of several species, a factor that has ultimately led, in some cases, to extinction. The South Island piopio, Chatham rail, and the New Zealand merganser are a few from a long list, with the most extreme case being the flightless Lyall's wren, which was driven to extinction only a few years after its discovery. One feral cat in New Zealand killed 102 New Zealand lesser short-tailed bats in seven days. In the United States, feral and free-ranging domestic cats kill an estimated 6.3–22.3 billion mammals annually.
In Australia, one study found feral cats to kill 466 million reptiles per year. More than 258 reptile species were identified as being predated by cats. Cats have contributed to the extinction of the Navassa curly-tailed lizard and Chioninia coctei.
Interaction with humans
Cats are common pets throughout the world, and their worldwide population as of 2007 exceeded 500 million. As of 2024, the domestic cat was the second most popular pet in the United States, with 73.8 million cats owned and around 42.2 million households owning at least one cat. In the United Kingdom, 26% of adults have a cat, with an estimated population of 10.9 million pet cats as of 2020. As of 2021, there were an estimated 220 million owned and 480 million stray cats in the world.
Cats have been used for millennia to control rodents, notably around grain stores and aboard ships, and both uses extend to the present day. Cats are also used in the international fur trade and leather industries for making coats, hats, blankets, stuffed toys, shoes, gloves, and musical instruments. About 24 cats are needed to make a cat-fur coat. This use has been outlawed in the United States since 2000 and in the European Union (as well as the United Kingdom) since 2007.
Cat pelts have been used for superstitious purposes as part of the practice of witchcraft, and they are still made into blankets in Switzerland as traditional medicines thought to cure rheumatism.
A few attempts to build a cat census have been made over the years, both through associations or national and international organizations (such as that of the Canadian Federation of Humane Societies) and over the Internet. General estimates for the global population of domestic cats range widely from anywhere between 200 million to 600 million. Walter Chandoha made his career photographing cats after his 1949 images of Loco, a stray cat, were published. He is reported to have photographed 90,000 cats during his career and maintained an archive of 225,000 images that he drew from for publications during his lifetime.
Pet humanization is a form of anthropomorphism in which cats are kept for companionship and treated more like human family members than traditional pets. This trend of pet culture involves providing cats with a higher level of care, attention and often even luxury, similar to the way humans are treated.
Shows
A cat show is a judged event in which the owners of cats compete to win titles in various cat-registering organizations by entering their cats to be judged after a breed standard. It is often required that a cat must be healthy and vaccinated to participate in a cat show. Both pedigreed and non-purebred companion ("moggy") cats are admissible, although the rules differ depending on the organization. Competing cats are compared to the applicable breed standard, and assessed for temperament.
Infection
Cats can be infected or infested with viruses, pathogenic bacteria, fungus, protozoans, arthropods or worms that can transmit diseases to humans; infections of most concern include salmonella, cat-scratch disease, and toxoplasmosis. In some cases, the cat exhibits no symptoms of the disease. The same disease can then become evident in a human. The likelihood that a person will become diseased depends on the age and immune status of the person. Others might also acquire infections from cat feces and parasites exiting the cat's body.
History and mythology
In ancient Egypt, cats were revered. The goddess Bastet was often depicted in cat form, sometimes taking on the war-like aspect of a lioness. The Greek historian Herodotus reported that killing a cat was forbidden, and when a household cat died, the entire family mourned and shaved their eyebrows. Families took their dead cats to the sacred city of Bubastis, where they were embalmed and buried in sacred repositories. Herodotus expressed astonishment at the domestic cats in Egypt, because he had only ever seen wildcats.
Ancient Greeks and Romans kept weasels as pets, which were seen as the ideal rodent-killers. The earliest unmistakable evidence of the Greeks having domestic cats comes from two coins from Magna Graecia dating to the mid-fifth century BC showing Iokastos and Phalanthos, the legendary founders of Rhegion and Taras respectively, playing with their pet cats. The usual ancient Greek word for 'cat' was ailouros, meaning 'thing with the waving tail'. Cats are rarely mentioned in ancient Greek literature. Aristotle remarked in his History of Animals that "female cats are naturally lecherous". The Greeks later syncretized their own goddess Artemis with the Egyptian goddess Bastet, adopting Bastet's associations with cats and ascribing them to Artemis. In Ovid's Metamorphoses, when the deities flee to Egypt and take animal forms, the goddess Diana turns into a cat.
Cats eventually displaced weasels as the pest control of choice because they were more pleasant to have around the house and were more enthusiastic hunters of mice. During the Middle Ages, many of Artemis's associations with cats were grafted onto the Virgin Mary. Cats are often shown in icons of Annunciation and of the Holy Family and, according to Italian folklore, on the same night that Mary gave birth to Jesus, a cat in Bethlehem gave birth to a kitten. Domestic cats were spread throughout much of the rest of the world during the Age of Discovery, as ships' cats were carried on sailing ships to control shipboard rodents and as good-luck charms.
Several ancient religions believed cats are exalted souls, companions or guides for humans, that are all-knowing but mute so they cannot influence decisions made by humans. In Japan, the maneki neko cat is a symbol of good fortune. In Norse mythology, Freyja, the goddess of love, beauty, and fertility, is depicted as riding a chariot drawn by cats. In Jewish legend, the first cat was living in the house of the first man Adam as a pet that got rid of mice. The cat was once partnering with the first dog before the latter broke an oath they had made which resulted in enmity between the descendants of these two animals. It is also written that neither cats nor foxes are represented in the water, while every other animal has an incarnation species in the water. Although no species are sacred in Islam, cats are revered by Muslims. Some Western writers have stated Muhammad had a favorite cat, Muezza. He is reported to have loved cats so much, "he would do without his cloak rather than disturb one that was sleeping on it". The story has no origin in early Muslim writers, and seems to confuse a story of a later Sufi saint, Ahmed ar-Rifa'i, centuries after Muhammad. One of the companions of Muhammad was known as Abu Hurayrah ("father of the kitten"), in reference to his documented affection to cats.
Superstitions and rituals
Many cultures have negative superstitions about cats. For example, that encountering a black cat ("crossing one's path") leads to bad luck, or that cats are witches' familiar spirits used to augment a witch's powers and skills. The killing of cats in medieval Ypres, Belgium, is commemorated in the innocuous present-day Kattenstoet (cat parade).
According to a myth in many cultures, cats have multiple lives. In many countries, they are believed to have nine lives, but in Italy, Germany, Greece, Brazil, and some Spanish-speaking regions, they are said to have seven lives, while in Arabic traditions, the number of lives is six. An early mention of the myth is in John Heywood's The Proverbs of John Heywood (1546):

The myth is attributed to the natural suppleness and swiftness cats exhibit to escape life-threatening situations. Falling cats often land on their feet, using an instinctive righting reflex to twist their bodies around.


Important Marine Mammal Areas (IMMAs) were formulated by the Marine Mammal Protected Areas Task Force (MMPATF), a joint initiative created in 2013 by the International Committee on Marine Mammal Protected Areas (ICMMPA), the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s (IUCN) World Commission on Protected Areas (WCPA) Marine Vice Chair, and members of the IUCN Species Survival Commission (SSC). The IMMAs are defined as "discrete portions of habitat, important to marine mammal species, that have the potential to be delineated and managed for conservation".
Global conservation contextMarine conservation, MPAs and IMMAs
Marine conservation is the overarching term that refers to the protection of threatened oceanic species, and usually involves the establishment of marine reserves. Marine conservation is increasingly beginning to make use of protected area models that are based on principles of landscape ecology and ecosystem management.
The most widely used protected area model is Marine protected areas (MPAs), whose purpose is to conserve biodiversity, protect vulnerable ecosystems and enhance marine invertebrate and fish productivity. MPAs however, have failed to properly account for marine mammals, who have been overlooked in many marine conservation efforts. As a result of this noted shortcoming in the previously existing conservation frameworks, IMMAs were introduced as a separate conservation measure to help rectify this issue.
Criteria for the selection of IMMAs
The initial criteria for identifying IMMAs were developed at the Workshop for the Development of Important Marine Mammal Area Criteria in Marseille, France, in October 2013. They were further refined in advance of the 3rd International Conference on Marine Mammal Protected Areas in Adelaide, Australia, in November 2014, and through the consultations of a working group following that conference. Finally, a public consultation was held online throughout September–October 2015 on the draft criteria, with the results of the consultation being presented at the Society for Marine Mammalogy Biennial Conference in San Francisco, United States, in December 2015. Consideration in the selection of IMMA criteria was given to the need of IMMAs to be used for the successive identification of Ecologically or Biologically Significant Areas (EBSAs) and Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs). The criteria for inclusion cover sites that host vulnerable species or a significant percentage of the members of a species, sites that are important for reproduction or feeding, and sites that are home to a wide variety of species.
IMMA Workshops
From 2016 onwards the major activity of the MMPATF has been to organise a series of regional expert workshops tasked with identifying IMMAs in several of the world's marine macroregions. The following seven IMMA workshops have been held to date:

2016 – Mediterranean region
2017 – Pacific Islands region
2018 – Extended Southern Ocean region
2018 – North East Indian Ocean and Southeast Asian Seas region
2019 – Western Indian Ocean and Arabian Seas region
2020 – Australia-New Zealand and South East Indian Ocean region
2021 – Black Sea, Turkish Straits System and Caspian Sea region
Current IMMAs
As of October 2021, 173 IMMAs have been identified following the hosting of seven expert workshops in the regions represented above. There are an additional 23 "candidate IMMAs" (cIMMAs) and 140 "Areas of Interest" (AoI). Details of all these are in the online IMMA searchable database, and displayed on the online e-Atlas.


Echidnas (), sometimes known as spiny anteaters, are quill-covered monotremes (egg-laying mammals) belonging to the family Tachyglossidae , living in Australia and New Guinea. The four extant species of echidnas and the platypus are the only living mammals that lay eggs and the only surviving members of the order Monotremata. The diet of some species consists of ants and termites, but they are not closely related to the American true anteaters or to hedgehogs. Their young are called puggles.
Echidnas evolved between 20 and 50 million years ago and descend from an amphibious, platypus-like monotreme.
Etymology
Echidnas are possibly named after Echidna, a creature from Greek mythology who was half-woman, half-snake, as the animal was perceived to have qualities of both mammals and reptiles. An alternative explanation is a confusion with Ancient Greek: ἐχῖνος, romanized: ekhînos, lit. 'hedgehog, sea urchin'.
A synonym for the echidna, in a mid-19th century British Encyclopaedia, is, “hedgehog of the Colonists at Sidney [sic]”.
Physical characteristics
Echidnas are medium-sized, solitary mammals covered with coarse hair and spines. The spines are modified hairs and are made of keratin, the same fibrous protein that makes up fur, claws, nails, and horn sheaths in animals.

Superficially, they resemble the anteaters of South America and other spiny mammals such as hedgehogs and porcupines. They are usually black or brown in coloration. There have been several reports of albino echidnas with pink eyes and white spines. They have elongated and slender snouts, or proboscises, that function as both mouth and nose, and which have electrosensors to find earthworms, termites, ants, and other burrowing prey. This is similar to the platypus, which has 40,000 electroreceptors on its bill, but the long-beaked echidna has only 2,000, while the short-beaked echidna, which lives in a drier environment, has no more than 400 at the tip of its snout.
Echidnas have short, strong limbs with large claws, and are powerful diggers. Their hind claws are elongated and curved backwards to aid in digging. Echidnas have tiny mouths and toothless jaws, and feed by tearing open soft logs, anthills and the like, and licking off prey with their long, sticky tongues. The ears are slits on the sides of their heads under the spines. The external ear is created by a large cartilaginous funnel, deep in the muscle. At 33 °C (91.4 °F), echidnas also possess the second-lowest active body temperature of all mammals, behind the platypus.
Despite their appearance, echidnas are capable swimmers, as they evolved from platypus-like ancestors. When swimming, they expose their snout and some of their spines, and are known to journey to water to bathe.
The first European drawing of an echidna was made in Adventure Bay, Tasmania by HMS Providence's third lieutenant George Tobin during William Bligh's second breadfruit voyage.
Diet
The short-beaked echidna's diet consists mostly of ants and termites, while the Zaglossus (long-beaked) species typically eat worms and insect larvae. The tongues of long-beaked echidnas have sharp, tiny spines that help them capture their prey. They have no teeth, so they break down their food by grinding it between the bottoms of their mouths and their tongues. Echidnas' faeces are 7 cm (3 in) long and are cylindrical in shape; they are usually broken and unrounded, and composed largely of dirt and ant-hill material.
Habitat
Echidnas do not tolerate extreme temperatures; they shelter from harsh weather in caves and rock crevices. Echidnas are found in forests and woodlands, hiding under vegetation, roots or piles of debris. They sometimes use the burrows (both abandoned and in use) of animals such as rabbits and wombats. Individual echidnas have large, mutually overlapping territories.
Anatomy
Echidnas and platypuses are the only egg-laying mammals, the monotremes.
The average lifespan of an echidna in the wild is estimated at 14–16 years. Fully grown females can weigh about 4.5 kilograms (9.9 lb), the males 33% larger, at about 6 kilograms (13 lb). Though the internal reproductive organs differ, both sexes possess an identical single cloaca opening for urination, defecation, and mating.
Male echidnas have non-venomous spurs on the hind feet, similar to the venomous male platypus.
Due to their low metabolism and accompanying stress resistance, echidnas are long-lived for their size; the longest recorded lifespan for a captive echidna is 50 years, with anecdotal accounts of wild individuals reaching 45 years.
The echidna's brain is half neocortex, compared to 80% of a human brain. Contrary to previous research, the echidna does enter REM sleep, but only in a comfortable temperature around 25 °C (77 °F). At lower or higher temperatures of 15 °C (59 °F) and 28 °C (82 °F), REM sleep is suppressed.
Reproduction
The female lays a single soft-shelled, leathery egg 22 days after mating, and deposits it directly into her pouch. An egg weighs 1.5 to 2 grams (0.05 to 0.07 oz) and is about 1.4 centimetres (0.55 in) long. While hatching, the baby echidna opens the leather shell with a reptile-like egg tooth. Hatching takes place after 10 days of gestation; the young echidna, called a puggle, born larval and fetus-like, then sucks milk from the pores of the two milk patches (monotremes have no teats) and remains in the pouch for 45 to 55 days, at which time it starts to develop spines. The mother digs a nursery burrow and deposits the young, returning every five days to suckle it until it is weaned at seven months. Puggles will stay within their mother's den for up to a year before leaving.Male echidnas have a four-headed penis. During mating, the heads on one side "shut down" and do not grow in size; the other two are used to release semen into the female's two-branched reproductive tract. Each time it copulates, it uses the pair of heads opposite those it used the previous time. When not in use, the penis is retracted inside a preputial sac in the cloaca. The male echidna's penis is 7 centimetres (2.8 in) long when erect, and its shaft is covered with penile spines.  These may be used to induce ovulation in the female.
It is a challenge to study the echidna in its natural habitat, and they show no interest in mating while in captivity. Prior to 2007, no one had ever seen an echidna ejaculate. There have been previous attempts, trying to force the echidna to ejaculate through the use of electrically stimulated ejaculation in order to obtain semen samples but this has only resulted in the penis swelling.
Breeding season begins in late June and extends through September. During mating season, a female may be followed by a line or "train" of up to ten males, the youngest trailing last, and some males switching between lines.
Threats
Echidnas are very timid. When frightened, they attempt to partially bury themselves and curl into a ball similar to a hedgehog. Strong front arms allow echidnas to dig in and hold fast against a predator pulling them from the hole.
Their many predators include feral cats, foxes, domestic dogs, and goannas. Snakes pose a large threat when they slither into echidna burrows and prey on the spineless young puggles.
They are easily stressed and injured by handling. Some ways to help echidnas include picking up litter, causing less pollution, planting vegetation for shelter, supervising pets, reporting hurt echidnas, and leaving them undisturbed.
In June 2024, scientists reported a first-of-its-kind encounter when they witnessed a tiger shark regurgitating a whole echidna off the coast of an island near Australia. Sharks are known to eat a wide range of animals, and occasionally objects, according to a news release by the researchers from James Cook University in North Queensland who also noted that sharks had previously been observed eating rocks for no apparent reason.
Evolution
The divergence between oviparous (egg-laying) and viviparous (offspring develop internally) mammals is believed to date to the Triassic period. Most findings from genetics studies (especially of nuclear genes) are in agreement with the palaeontological dating, but some other evidence, like mitochondrial DNA, give slightly different dates.
Molecular clock data suggest echidnas split from platypuses between 19 and 48 million years ago, so that platypus-like fossils dating back to over 112.5 million years ago represent basal forms, rather than close relatives of the modern platypus. This would imply that echidnas evolved from water-foraging ancestors that returned to land living, which put them in competition with marsupials. Although extant monotremes lack adult teeth (platypuses have teeth only as juveniles), many extinct monotreme species have been identified based on the morphology of their teeth. Of the eight genes involved in tooth development, four have been lost in both platypus and echidna, indicating that the loss of teeth occurred before the echidna-platypus split.
Further evidence of water-foraging ancestors can be found in some of the echidna's anatomy, including hydrodynamic streamlining, dorsally projecting hind limbs acting as rudders, and locomotion founded on hypertrophied humeral long-axis rotation, which provides an efficient swimming stroke.
Oviparous reproduction in monotremes may give them an advantage over marsupials in some environments. Their observed adaptive radiation contradicts the assumption that monotremes are frozen in morphological and molecular evolution.
It has been suggested that echidnas originally evolved in New Guinea when it was isolated from Australia and from marsupials. This would explain their rarity in the fossil record, their abundance in present times in New Guinea, and their original adaptation to terrestrial niches, presumably without competition from marsupials.
Taxonomy
Echidnas are a small clade with two extant genera and four species. The genus Zaglossus includes three extant and two fossil species, with only one extant species from the genus Tachyglossus.
Zaglossus
The three living Zaglossus species are endemic to New Guinea. They are rare and are hunted for food. They forage in leaf litter on the forest floor, eating earthworms and insects. The species are

Western long-beaked echidna (Z. bruijni), of the highland forests;
Sir David's long-beaked echidna (Z. attenboroughi), discovered by Western science in 1961 (described in 1998) and preferring a still higher habitat;
Eastern long-beaked echidna (Z. bartoni), of which four distinct subspecies have been identified.
Tachyglossus
The short-beaked echidna (Tachyglossus aculeatus) is found in southern, southeast and northeast New Guinea, and also occurs in almost all Australian environments, from the snow-clad Australian Alps to the deep deserts of the Outback, essentially anywhere ants and termites are available. It is smaller than the Zaglossus species, and it has longer hair.

Despite the similar dietary habits and methods of consumption to those of an anteater, there is no evidence supporting the idea that echidna-like monotremes have been myrmecophagous (ant or termite-eating) since the Cretaceous. The fossil evidence of invertebrate-feeding bandicoots and rat-kangaroos, from around the time of the platypus–echidna divergence and pre-dating Tachyglossus, show evidence that echidnas expanded into new ecospace despite competition from marsupials.
Additionally, extinct echidnas continue to be described by taxonomists;
Megalibgwilia
The genus Megalibgwilia is known only from fossils:

M. owenii from Late Pleistocene sites in Australia;
M. robusta from Pliocene sites in Australia.
Murrayglossus
The genus Murrayglossus is known only from fossils:

M. hacketti (previously classified in the genus Zaglossus) from Pleistocene of Western Australia.
As food
The Kunwinjku people of Western Arnhem Land (Australia) call the echidna ngarrbek, and regard it as a prized food and "good medicine". The echidna is hunted at night, gutted, and filled with hot stones and mandak (Persoonia falcata) leaves. According to Larrakia elders Una Thompson and Stephanie Thompson Nganjmirra, once captured, an echidna is carried attached to the wrist like a thick bangle.
In popular culture
The echidna appears on the reverse of the Australian five-cent coin.
An echidna named Millie was one of the three official mascots for the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney.
The Sonic the Hedgehog franchise features a range of anthropomorphic animals, one of the most prominent being Knuckles the Echidna.


This is a collection of lists of mammal species by the estimated global population, divided by orders. Lists only exist for some orders; for example, the most diverse order - rodents - is missing. Much of the data in these lists were created by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Global Mammal Assessment Team, which consists of 1700 mammalogists from over 130 countries. They recognize 5488 species in the class.
These lists are not comprehensive, as not all mammals have had their numbers estimated. For example, a live specimen of the spade-toothed whale was first observed in December 2010, and the event only recognized as such in November 2012; no estimate yet exists for the global population. The accuracy of the quote numbers may only be an order of magnitude.
It is estimated that the total number of wild mammals in the world is about 130 billion.
Lists by taxonomic order
Monotremata

List of monotremes by population – platypus, echidnas
Marsupialia (infraclass containing 7 extant orders)

List of marsupials by population – shrew opossums, opossums, marsupial moles, bandicoots, dasyurids, diprodonts (kangaroos, wallabies, wombats, koalas).
Xenarthra (superorder containing 2 extant orders)

List of xenarthrans by population – anteaters, tree sloths, armadillos.
Afrotheria (superorder containing 6 extant orders)

Proboscidea
List of elephant species by population – elephants.
Hyracoidea, Sirenia, Tubulidentata, Macroscelidea, Afrosoricida
List of non-proboscid afrotheres by population – hyraxes, sea cows, aardvarks, elephant shrews, golden moles, otter shrews, tenrecs
Eulipotyphla

List of eulipotyphlans by population – hedgehogs, shrews, moles, solenodons
Chiroptera

List of bats by population – bats.
Pholidota

List of pangolin species by population – pangolins
Carnivora

List of carnivorans by population – cats, viverrids, hyenas, mongoose, canines, procyonids, bears, mustelids, skunks, and pinnipeds.
Perissodactyla

List of odd-toed ungulates by population – equines, rhinoceroses, tapirs.
Artiodactyla

List of even-toed ungulates by population – swine, hippopotamus, giraffes, chevrotains, cervids, bovids.
List of cetacean species with population estimates – dolphins, porpoises, whales.
Scandentia

List of tree shrews by population – tree shrews.
Lagomorpha

List of lagomorphs by population – rabbits, hares, pikas.
Rodentia

List of rodents by population – beavers, squirrels, mice, rats, etc.
Dermoptera

List of colugos by population – colugos.
Primates

List of primates by population – lemurs, lorises, tarsiers, monkeys, apes.


Moles are small, subterranean mammals. They have cylindrical bodies, velvety fur, very small, inconspicuous eyes and ears, reduced hindlimbs, and short, powerful forelimbs with large paws adapted for digging.
The word "mole" most commonly refers to many species in the family Talpidae (which are named after the Latin word for mole, talpa). True moles are found in most parts of North America, Europe (except for Ireland) and Asia. Other mammals referred to as moles include the African golden moles and the Australian marsupial moles, which have a similar ecology and lifestyle to true moles but are unrelated.
Moles may be viewed as pests to gardeners, but they provide positive contributions to soil, gardens, and ecosystems, including soil aeration, feeding on slugs and small creatures that eat plant roots, and providing prey for other wildlife. They eat earthworms and other small invertebrates in the soil.
Terminology
In Middle English, moles were known as moldwarps. By the era of Early Modern English, the mole was also known in English as mouldywarp or mouldiwarp, a word having cognates in other Germanic languages such as German (Maulwurf), and Danish, Norwegian, Swedish and Icelandic (muldvarp, moldvarp, mullvad, moldvarpa), where muld/mull/mold refers to soil and varp/vad/varpa refers to throwing, hence "one who throws soil" or "dirt-tosser".
Male moles are called "boars"; females are called "sows".
CharacteristicsUnderground breathing
Moles have been found to tolerate higher levels of carbon dioxide than other mammals, because their blood cells have a special form of hemoglobin that has a higher affinity to oxygen than other forms. In addition, moles use oxygen more effectively by reusing the exhaled air, and can survive in low-oxygen environments, such as burrows.
Extra thumbs
Moles have polydactyl forepaws: each has an extra thumb (also known as a prepollex) next to the regular thumb. While the mole's other digits have multiple joints, the prepollex has a single, sickle-shaped bone that develops later and differently from the other fingers during embryogenesis from a transformed sesamoid bone in the wrist, independently evolved but similar to the giant panda thumb. This supernumerary digit is species-specific, as it is not present in shrews, the mole's closest relatives. Androgenic steroids are known to affect the growth and formation of bones, and a connection is possible between this species-specific trait and the male genital apparatus in female moles of many mole species (gonads with testicular and ovary tissues).
Diet
Moles are omnivores, but their diet primarily consists of earthworms and other small invertebrates found in the soil. The mole runs are in reality "worm traps", the mole sensing when a worm falls into the tunnel and quickly running along to kill and eat it. Because their saliva contains a toxin that can paralyze earthworms, moles are able to store their still-living prey for later consumption. They construct special underground "larders" for just this purpose; researchers have discovered such larders with over a thousand earthworms in them. Before eating earthworms, moles pull them between their squeezed paws to force the collected earth and dirt out of the worm's gut.
The star-nosed mole can detect, catch and eat food faster than the human eye can follow.
Breeding
Breeding season for a mole depends on species, but is generally from February through May. Males search for females by letting out high-pitched squeals and tunneling through foreign areas.
The gestation period of the Eastern (North America) mole (Scalopus aquaticus) is approximately 42 days. Three to five young are born, mainly in March and early April. Townsend's moles mate in February and March, and the 2–4 young are born in March and April after a gestation period of about 1 month.
Social structure
Moles appear to be solitary creatures, coming together only to mate. Territories may overlap, but moles avoid each other and males may fight fiercely if they meet.
Classification
The family Talpidae contains all the true moles and some of their close relatives. Those species called "shrew moles" represent an intermediate form between the moles and their shrew ancestors, and as such may not be fully described by the article.
Moles were traditionally classified in the order Insectivora, but that order has since been abandoned because it has been shown to not be monophyletic. Moles are now classified with shrews and hedgehogs, in the more narrowly defined order Eulipotyphla.

Subfamily Scalopinae: New World moles
Tribe Condylurini: Star-nosed mole (North America)
Genus Condylura: Star-nosed mole (the sole species)
Tribe Scalopini: New World moles
Genus Alpiscaptulus: Medog mole (China)
Genus Parascalops: Hairy-tailed mole (northeastern North America)
Genus Scalopus: Eastern mole (North America)
Genus Scapanulus: Gansu mole (China)
Genus Scapanus: Western North American moles (five species)
Subfamily Talpinae: Old World moles, desmans, and shrew moles
Tribe Desmanini
Genus Desmana: Russian desman
Genus Galemys: Pyrenean desman
Tribe Talpini: Old World moles
Genus Euroscaptor: Ten Asian species
Genus Mogera: Nine species from Japan, Korea, and eastern China
Genus Parascaptor: White-tailed mole, southern Asia
Genus Scaptochirus: Short-faced mole, China
Genus Talpa: Thirteen species, Europe and western Asia
Tribe Scaptonychini: Long-tailed mole
Genus Scaptonyx: Long-tailed mole (China and Myanmar (Burma))
Tribe Urotrichini: Japanese shrew moles
Genus Dymecodon: True's shrew mole
Genus Urotrichus: Japanese shrew mole
Tribe Neurotrichini: New World shrew moles
Genus Neurotrichus: American shrew mole (US Pacific Northwest, southwest British Columbia)
Subfamily Uropsilinae: Asian shrew moles
Genus Uropsilus: Five species in China, Bhutan, and Myanmar (Burma)
Other "moles"
Many groups of burrowing animals (pink fairy armadillos, tuco-tucos, mole rats, mole crickets, pygmy mole crickets, and mole crabs) have independently developed close physical similarities with moles due to convergent evolution; two of these are so similar to true moles, they are commonly called and thought of as "moles" in common English, although they are completely unrelated to true moles or to each other. These are the golden moles of southern Africa and the marsupial moles of Australia. While difficult to distinguish from each other, they are most easily distinguished from true moles by shovel-like patches on their noses, which they use in tandem with their abbreviated forepaws to swim through sandy soils.
Golden moles
The golden moles belong to the same branch on the phylogenetic tree as the tenrecs, called Tenrecomorpha, which, in turn, stem from a main branch of placental mammals called the Afrosoricida. This means that they share a closer common ancestor with such existing afrosoricids as elephants, manatees and aardvarks than they do with other placental mammals, such as true Talpidae moles.

ORDER AFROSORICIDA
Suborder Tenrecomorpha
Family Tenrecidae: tenrecs, 34 species in 10 genera
Suborder Chrysochloridea
Family Chrysochloridae
Subfamily Chrysochlorinae
Genus Carpitalpa
Arends' golden mole (Carpitalpa arendsi)
Genus Chlorotalpa
Duthie's golden mole (Chlorotalpa duthieae)
Sclater's golden mole (Chlorotalpa sclateri)
Genus Chrysochloris
Subgenus Chrysochloris
Cape golden mole (Chrysochloris asiatica)
Visagie's golden mole (Chrysochloris visagiei)
Subgenus Kilimatalpa
Stuhlmann's golden mole (Chrysochloris stuhlmanni)
Genus Chrysospalax
Giant golden mole (Chrysospalax trevelyani)
Rough-haired golden mole (Chrysospalax villosus)
Genus Cryptochloris
De Winton's golden mole (Cryptochloris wintoni)
Van Zyl's golden mole (Cryptochloris zyli)
Genus Eremitalpa
Grant's golden mole (Eremitalpa granti)
Subfamily Amblysominae
Genus Amblysomus
Fynbos golden mole (Amblysomus corriae)
Hottentot golden mole (Amblysomus hottentotus)
Marley's golden mole (Amblysomus marleyi)
Robust golden mole (Amblysomus robustus)
Highveld golden mole (Amblysomus septentrionalis)
Genus Calcochloris
Subgenus Huetia
Congo golden mole (Calcochloris leucorhinus)
Subgenus Calcochloris
Yellow golden mole (Calcochloris obtusirostris)
Subgenus incertae sedis
Somali golden mole (Calcochloris tytonis)
Genus Neamblysomus
Juliana's golden mole (Neamblysomus julianae)
Gunning's golden mole (Neamblysomus gunningi)
Marsupial moles
As marsupials, these moles are even more distantly related to true talpid moles than golden moles are, both of which belong to the Eutheria, or placental mammals. This means that they are more closely related to such existing Australian marsupials as kangaroos or koalas, and even to a lesser extent to American marsupials, such as opossums, than they are to placental mammals, such as golden or Talpidae moles.
Class Mammalia

Subclass Prototheria: monotremes (echidnas and the platypus)
Subclass Theriiformes: live-bearing mammals and their prehistoric relatives
Infraclass Holotheria: modern live-bearing mammals and their prehistoric relatives
Supercohort Theria: live-bearing mammals
Cohort Marsupialia: marsupials
Magnorder Ameridelphia: New World marsupials
Order Didelphimorphia (opossums)
Order Paucituberculata (shrew opossums)
Superorder Australidelphia Australian marsupials
Order Dasyuromorphia (the Tasmanian devil, the numbat, thylacines, quolls, dunnarts and others)
Order Peramelemorphia (bilbies, bandicoots and rainforest bandicoots)
Order Diprotodontia (koalas, wombats, diprotodonts, possums, cuscuses, sugar gliders, kangaroos and others)
Order Notoryctemorphia (marsupial moles and closely related extinct families of marsupials)
Family Notoryctidae (living and extinct marsupial mole genera)
Genus Notoryctes (only genus of marsupial moles with living species)
Species Notoryctes typhlops (southern marsupial mole)
Species Notoryctes caurinus (northern marsupial mole)
Interaction with humansPelts
Moles' pelts have a velvety texture not found in surface animals. Surface-dwelling animals tend to have longer fur with a natural tendency for the nap to lie in a particular direction, but to facilitate their burrowing lifestyle, mole pelts are short and very dense and have no particular direction to the nap. This makes it easy for moles to move backwards underground, as their fur is not "brushed the wrong way". The leather is extremely soft and supple. Queen Alexandra, the wife of Edward VII of the United Kingdom, ordered a mole-fur garment to start a fashion that would create a demand for mole fur, thereby turning what had been a serious pest problem in Scotland into a lucrative industry for the country. Hundreds of pelts are cut into rectangles and sewn together to make a coat. The natural color is taupe, (derived from the French noun taupe meaning mole) but it is readily dyed any color.
The term "moleskin" for a tough cotton fabric is in common use today.
Pest status: extermination and humane options
Moles are considered agricultural pests in some countries, while in others, such as Germany, they are a protected species, but may be killed with a permit. Problems cited as caused by moles include contamination of silage with soil particles, making it unpalatable to livestock, the covering of pasture with fresh soil reducing its size and yield, damage to agricultural machinery by the exposure of stones, damage to young plants through disturbance of the soil, weed invasion of pasture through exposure of freshly tilled soil, and damage to drainage systems and watercourses. Other species such as weasels and voles may use mole tunnels to gain access to enclosed areas or plant roots.
Moles burrow and raise molehills, killing parts of lawns. They can undermine plant roots, indirectly causing damage or death. Moles do not eat plant roots.

Moles are controlled with traps such as mole-catchers, smoke bombs, and poisons such as calcium carbide, which produces acetylene gas to drive moles away. Strychnine was also used for this purpose in the past. The most common method now is Phostoxin or Talunex tablets. They contain aluminium phosphide and are inserted in the mole tunnels, where they turn into phosphine gas (not be confused with phosgene gas). More recently, high-grade nitrogen gas has proven effective at killing moles, with the added advantage of having no polluting effect to the environment.

Other common defensive measures include cat litter and blood meal, to repel the mole, or smoking its burrow. Devices are also sold to trap the mole in its burrow, when one sees the "mole hill" moving and therefore knows where the animal is, and then stabbing it.
Other humane options are also possible including humane traps that capture the mole alive so it may be transported elsewhere. In many contexts including ordinary gardens, the damage caused by moles to lawns is mostly visual, and it is possible instead of extermination to simply remove the earth of the molehills as they appear, leaving their permanent galleries for the moles to continue their existence underground. However, when the tunnels are near the surface in soft ground or after heavy rain, they may collapse, leaving (small) unsightly furrows in the lawn.
Meat
William Buckland, known for eating every animal he could, opined that mole meat tasted vile.
Archaeology
Moles can inadvertently help archaeologists by bringing small artifacts to the surface through their digging. By examining molehills for sherds and other small objects, archaeologists can find evidence of human habitation.


Marine mammals are a food source in many countries around the world. Historically, they were hunted by coastal people, and in the case of aboriginal whaling, still are. This sort of subsistence hunting was on a small scale and produced only localised effects. Dolphin drive hunting continues in this vein, from the South Pacific to the North Atlantic. The commercial whaling industry and the maritime fur trade, which had devastating effects on marine mammal populations, did not focus on the animals as food, but for other resources, namely whale oil and seal fur.
Today, the consumption of marine mammals is much reduced. However, a 2011 study found that the number of humans eating them, from a surprisingly wide variety of species, is increasing. According to the study's lead author, Martin Robards, "Some of the most commonly eaten animals are small cetaceans like the lesser dolphins... That was a surprise since only a decade ago there had only been only scattered reports of this happening".
History
Historically, marine mammals were hunted by coastal aboriginal humans for food and other resources. The effects of this were only localised as hunting efforts were on a relatively small scale. Later, commercial hunting was developed and marine mammals were heavily exploited. This led to the extinction of the Steller's Sea Cow and the Caribbean monk seal. Today, populations of species that were historically hunted, such as blue whales Balaenoptera musculus and B. m. brevicauda), and the North Pacific right whale (Eubalaena japonica), are much lower compared to their pre-exploited levels. Because whales generally have slow growth rates, are slow to reach sexual maturity, and have a low reproductive output, population recovery has been very slow.
Despite the fact commercial whaling is generally a thing of the past since the passage of the International Whaling Commission’s (IWC) moratorium on commercial whaling, a number of marine mammals are still subject to direct hunting. The only remaining commercial hunting of whales is by Norway where several hundred northeastern North Atlantic minke whales are harvested each year, and Iceland, which takes approximately 150 North Atlantic fin whales and less than 50 minke whales each year. Japan also harvests several hundred Antarctic and North Pacific minke whales each year under the guise of scientific research. However, the illegal trade of whale and dolphin meat is a significant market in some countries.  Seals and sealions are also still hunted in some areas such as Canada.
Overview
For thousands of years, Arctic people have depended on whale meat. In Alaska now, the meat is harvested from legal, non-commercial hunts that occur twice a year in the spring and autumn. The meat is stored and eaten throughout the winter. Coastal Alaska Natives divided their catch into 10 sections. The fatty tail, considered to be the best part, went to the captain of the conquering vessel, while the less-desired sections were given to his crew and others that assisted with the kill. The skin and blubber (muktuk) taken from the bowfin, beluga, or narwhal is also valued, and is eaten raw or cooked.
In recent years Japan resumed hunting for whales, which they call "research whaling".  Japanese research vessels refer to the harvested whale meat as incidental byproducts resulting from lethal study. In 2006, 5,560 tons of whale meat was sold for consumption. In modern-day Japan, two cuts of whale meat are usually distinguished: the belly meat and the tail or fluke meat. Fluke meat can sell for $200 per kilogram, over three times the price of belly meat. Fin whales are particularly desired because they are thought to yield the best quality fluke meat.
In some parts of the world, such as Taiji in Japan and the Faroe Islands, dolphins are traditionally considered food, and are killed in harpoon or drive hunts. Whaling has also been practiced in the Faroe Islands in the North Atlantic since about the time of the first Norse settlements on the islands. Around 1000 Long-finned pilot whales are still killed annually, mainly during the summer.
Dolphin meat is consumed in a small number of countries world-wide, which include Japan and Peru (where it is referred to as chancho marino, or "sea pork"). While Japan may be the best-known and most controversial example, only a very small minority of the population has ever sampled it.
In Taiwan, demand for dolphin meat still exists. Despite laws banning the slaughter of dolphins and jail-time consequences for anyone who consumes dolphin meat, as many as 1,000 dolphins are killed by Taiwanese fishermen each year.
Dolphin meat is dense and such a dark shade of red as to appear black. Fat is located in a layer of blubber between the meat and the skin. When dolphin meat is eaten in Japan, it is often cut into thin strips and eaten raw as sashimi, garnished with onion and either horseradish or grated garlic, much as with sashimi of whale or horse meat (basashi). When cooked, dolphin meat is cut into bite-size cubes and then batter-fried or simmered in a miso sauce with vegetables. Cooked dolphin meat has a flavor very similar to beef liver. Dolphin meat is high in mercury, and may pose a health danger to humans when consumed.
Ringed seals were once the main food staple for the Inuit. They are still an important food source for the people of Nunavut and are also hunted and eaten in Alaska. Seal meat is an important source of food for residents of small coastal communities. Meat is sold to the Asian pet food market; in 2004, only Taiwan and South Korea purchased seal meat from Canada. The seal blubber is used to make seal oil, which is marketed as a fish oil supplement. In 2001, two percent of Canada's raw seal oil was processed and sold in Canadian health stores. There has been virtually no market for seal organs since 1998. Archaeological evidence indicates that for thousands of years, indigenous peoples have also hunted sea otters for food and fur.


Armania is an extinct genus of rhinocerotoid of disputed affinities that lived in East Asia during the Late Eocene. A single species is recognized, A. asiana, known from the Ergilin Dzo Formation in Mongolia. Armania is known from fragmentary skull material and has been classified in various positions within Rhinocerotoidea. Recent research generally favors Armania as either an amynodont or a hyracodont.
Research history
Armania asiana is known from the Late Eocene Ergilin Dzo Formation in Mongolia. The genus and species were described by Gabunia Leonide Gabunia and Demberelyin Dashzeveg in 1988, with additional descriptive and systematic work being published by Dashzeveg in 1991. The only fossils known of Armania are fragments of upper jaws and isolated teeth.
The name Armania is derived from the Mongolian word for rhinoceros, arman. The species name asiana is derived from the Latin asianus ("Asian").
Description
Armania was evidently a specialized rhinocerotoid, showcasing some derived features. Armania had a much reduced facial region; the front edge of the orbits (eye sockets) of Armania was directly above its second upper premolars and tt had a relatively shallow nasal incisions, which nevertheless reached very nearly all the way to the orbits.
Armania had hypsodont (high-crowned) teeth. The canines were well-developed, round in cross-section, and directed slightly downwards and forwards.
Classification
Dashzeveg classified Armania as a hyracodont, though did so at a time when the paraceratheres were also believed to be part of that family. He specifically classified it as an "indricotheriine hyracodontid" (i.e. what is presently understood as the family Paraceratheriidae). Dashzeveg believed Armania to be a descendant of Forstercooperia. In 1996, Dashzeveg erected a new hyracodont subfamily, "Alloceropinae", in which he included Armania, Eggysodon, Forstercooperia, Juxia, and Tenisia.
Later paleontologists have disagreed with Dashzeveg's classification of Armania, but opinions are divided over its correct position. Koenigswald, Holbrook & Rose (2011) and Lopatin (2020) classified Armania as an amynodont. Bai et al. (2020) and Tsubamoto et al. (2022) classified Armania as a hyracodont.


The American Society of Mammalogists (ASM) was founded in 1919 to encourage the study of mammals. There are over 4,500 members, primarily professional scientists who emphasize the importance of public policy and education.  There are several ASM meetings held each year, and the society manages several publications such as the Journal of Mammalogy, Special Publications, Mammalian Species, and Society Pamphlets.  The best known of these is the Journal of Mammalogy. The ASM also maintains The Mammal Image Library which contains more than 1,300 mammal slides.  A president, vice president, recording secretary, secretary-treasurer, and journal editor are all elected by the members to be officers of the society. In addition, ASM is composed of thirty one committees, including the Animal Care and Use Committee, the Conservation Awards Committee, the International Relations Committee, and the Publications Committee. It also provides numerous grants and awards for research and studies on mammals. These awards can go to both scientists and students. The ASM also lists employment opportunities for their members.
History
Milo Herrick Spaulding was a charter member.
Mammal Diversity Database
Since 2018, the American Society of Mammalogists has maintained the Mammal Diversity Database, an online checklist of mammal species. The database is maintained by the ASM Biodiversity Committee and "aims to provide a continuously updated listing of the world's mammal species and higher taxa." The latest update (version 2.2) was released on June 13, 2025, and lists 6,815 species placed in 1,359 genera, 167 families and 27 orders.
Mammal Societies
A list of world mammalogical societies associated with or that publish in the ASM. By 2017, the ASM had 865 non-US members from 88 countries.

Argentina: Sociedad Argentina para el Estudio de los Mamíferos (Argentine Society for the Study of Mammals, SAREM). Official journal: Mastozoología Neotropical (Journal of Neotropical Mammalogy).
Australia: The Australian Mammal Society. Official journal: Australian Mammalogy.
Bolivia: Red Boliviana de Mastozoología (RBM; formerly the Asociación Boliviana de Investigadores de Mamíferos, ABIMA) Official publication: None. Articles are published through the organization's Facebook page, the "Publicaciones" section on the RBM website, Revista Latinoamericana de Conservación (Latin American Journal of Conservation), PLoS One, Therya, Ecología en Bolivia (Ecology in Bolivia Journal of the Institute of Ecology), or the Journal of Mammalogy.
Brazil: Sociedade Brasileira de Mastozoologia (Brazilian Society of Mastozoology, or Brazilian Society of Mammalogy, SMBz). Official publication[s]: Brazilian Journal of Mammalogy (BJM) and co-edits the Journal of Neotropical Mammalogy with SAREM.
Colombia: Sociedad Colombiana de Mastozoología (Colombian Society of Mammalogy, SCMas). Official journal: Mammalogy Notes (Notas Mastozoológicas (MaNo)
Ecuador: Mamíferos del Ecuador (Ecuadorian Association of Mammalogy). Affiliated with the Latin American Network of Mammalogy (RELAM) and the International Federation of Mammalogists (IFM). Official publication: Mammalia aequatorialis (The Ecuadorian Journal of Mammalogy)
El Salvador: Grupo de Trabajo de Mastozoología de El Salvador (GTMES). Official publication: Unknown
Europe: Societas Europaea Mammalogica (European Mammal Foundation, SEM), registered in the Netherlands. The IX European Congress of Mammalogy (ECM9), organized by the Hellenic Zoological Society, the European Mammal Foundation, and Mammal Conservation Europe convened in Patras, Greece from March 31 to April 4, 2025.
France: Societe Francaise pour l'Etude et la protection des Mammiferes (The French Society for the Study and Protection of Mammals, SFEPM), supports and coordinates the National Mammal Observatory (ONM) The organization publishes the journal "Arvicola", the magazines Mammifères Sauvages (Wild Mammals) and L'Envol des Chiros.
Germany: Deutsche Gesellschaft für Säugetierkunde (German Society for Mammalian Biology). Official publication: Mammalian Biology (Formerly Zeitschrift für Säugetierkunde).
Guatemala: Asociación Guatemalteca de Mastozoología
International Federation of Mammalogists:
Italy: Associazione Teriologica Italiana (ATIt) within the Department of Biology and Biotechnology "Charles Darwin" University of Rome ("La Sapienza"). Official publication: Hystrix, the Italian Journal of Mammalogy.
Japan: Mammalogical Society of Japan (MSJ). A joining of the Mammalogical Society of Japan, founded in 1949, and the Research Group of Mammalogists, founded in 1955. Official publication: The quarterly Mammal Study in English and the bi-annual Honyurui Kagaku (Mammalian Science), written in Japanese.
Mexico: Asociación Mexicana de Mastozoología, A.C. (Mexican Association of Mammalogy, AMMAC). Official publication: Therya (English), Therya Notes (English and Spanish), and THERYA ixmana (Spanish) published quarterly.
Panama: Sociedad Mastozoológica de Panamá (Mammalogical Society of Panama, SOMASPA).
Paraguay: Associacion Paraguaya de Mastozoologia (Paraguayan Association of Mammalogy) Official publication: Mastozoología Neotropical (Journal of Neotropical Mammalogy) through SAREM (see Argentine above) and the Notas Sobre Mamiferos Sudamericanos (Notes on South American Mammals).
People’s Republic of China: Mammalogical Society of China (MSC), an NGO, is part of the Zoological Society of China, It is also known as the Branch of Mammalogical Society of China Zoology Society, and falls under the Biological sciences. The China Primatological Society was formed from the Primatological Specialist Group (PSG) of the MSC. The Institute of Zoology (IOZ) is under the Chinese Academy of Sciences, which is the host and administrative entity of the MSC. The China Biodiversity Observation Network (China BON) includes the China Mammal Diversity Observation Network (China BON-Mammal), under the China Ministry of Ecology and Environment (MEE), works with the MSC. Official publication: Acta Theriologica Sinica.
Peru: There are two mammalogy organizations. The Asociación de Mastozoólogos del Perú (Association of Mastozoologists of Peru, AMP). AMP has become more active than the Peruvian Society of Mammals (Sociedad Peruana de Mastozoología, SPM). The SPM is a member of the ASM, and held the Symposium Notas sobre el I Congreso Peruano de Mastozoología, in Cusco, Perú, and hosted the Third Congress of the Peruvian Society of Mammalogy in 2012.
Russia: Russian Theriological Society of the Russian Academy of Sciences, formally the All-Russian Theriological Society. Official publication: Russian Journal of Theriology.
Spain: Sociedad Española para la Conservación y Estudio de los Mamíferos (Spanish Society for the Conservation and Study of Mammals, SECEM). Official publication: Galemys, Spanish Journal of Mammalogy. The Iberian Peninsula includes Portugal and Spain as well as Andorra, and the territory of Gibraltar. A small part of France (French Cerdagne or Cerdagne française) shares the Pyrenean valley ecosystem. This includes the Ordesa y Monte Perdido National Park, Pyrénées National Park, and the Aigüestortes National Park (only 25 miles (40 km) away from France. In 1997, UNESCO designated the shared area as the Pyrenees-Monte Perdido World Heritage Site. There is a large diversity of fauna. The list, named "Review of the Red List of Mammals of Mainland Portugal and Contribution to the Assessment of their Conservation Status" (2019) covers mammals in mainland Portugal and the Azores and Madeira.
Switzerland: Schweizerische Gesellschaft für Wildtierbiologie (Swiss Society for Wildlife Biology, SGW) Official publication: CH-WILDiNFO: The parent organization, the Swiss Zoological Society (SZS), co-publishes the Revue suisse de Zoologie.
United Kingdom: The Mammal Society. Official journal: Mammal Review.
Venezuela: Asociación Venezolana para el Estudio de los Mamíferos (Venezuelan Association for the Study of Mammals, AsoVEM). Official publication: None. Researchers publish in the ASM, Anartia (Univ Zulia Museo Biologia) and other peer-reviewed journals such as the Venezuelan science journal Memoria de la Fundación La Salle de Ciencias Naturales.
Portugal: Sociedade Portuguesa de Etologia (Portuguese Society of Ethology, SPE). While lacking a specific mammalian organization, there is the Marine Environment Research Association (AIMM Portugal), Portuguese Primatological Association (APP), and the Red List of "Mammals in Portugal" Project that, in 2023, listed 16 new species. The University of Lisbon Red List of Vertebrates and the International Union for Conservation of Nature, as well as the Center for Environmental and Marine Sciences (CESAM), the Institute for Nature Conservation and Forests (ICNF), and organizations such as the cross-border (Spain and Portugal) LIFE LUPI LYNX (LIFE LUPILYNX) initiative, supported by Rewilding Portugal, and the European Union LIFE Programme. and Interreg Spain-Portugal (POCTEP) Research from Portuguese institutions is published in the Journal of Mammalogy as well as other international journals.


Sloths are a Neotropical group of xenarthran mammals constituting the suborder Folivora, including the extant arboreal tree sloths and extinct terrestrial ground sloths. Noted for their slowness of movement, tree sloths spend most of their lives hanging upside down in the trees of the tropical rainforests of South America and Central America. Sloths are considered to be most closely related to anteaters, together making up the xenarthran order Pilosa.
There are seven extant sloth species in two genera – Bradypus (three-toed sloths) and Choloepus (two-toed sloths). Despite this traditional naming, all sloths have three toes on each rear limb – although two-toed sloths have only two digits on each forelimb. The two groups of sloths are from different, distantly related families, and are thought to have evolved their morphology via parallel evolution from terrestrial ancestors. Besides the extant species, many species of ground sloths ranging up to the size of elephants (like Megatherium) inhabited both North and South America during the Pleistocene Epoch. However, they became extinct during the Quaternary extinction event around 12,000 years ago, along with most large animals across the Americas. The extinction correlates in time with the arrival of humans, but climate change has also been suggested to have contributed. Members of an endemic radiation of Caribbean sloths also formerly lived in the Greater Antilles but became extinct after humans settled the archipelago in the mid-Holocene, around 6,000 years ago.
Sloths are so named because of their very low metabolism and deliberate movements. Sloth, related to slow, literally means "laziness", and their common names in several other languages (e.g. German: Faultier, French: paresseux, Spanish: perezoso, Portuguese: preguiça, Romanian: leneș, Finnish: laiskiainen) also mean "lazy" or similar. Their slowness permits their low-energy diet of leaves and avoids detection by predatory hawks and cats that hunt by sight. Sloths are almost helpless on the ground but are able to swim. The shaggy coat has grooved hair that is host to symbiotic green algae which camouflage the animal in the trees and provide it nutrients. The algae also nourish sloth moths, some species of which exist solely on sloths.
Taxonomy and evolution
Sloths belong to the superorder Xenarthra, a group of placental mammals believed to have evolved in the continent of South America around 60 million years ago. One study found that xenarthrans broke off from other placental mammals around 100 million years ago. Anteaters and armadillos are also included among Xenarthra. The earliest xenarthrans were arboreal herbivores with sturdy vertebral columns, fused pelvises, stubby teeth, and small brains. Sloths are in the taxonomic suborder Folivora of the order Pilosa. These names are from the Latin 'leaf eater' and 'hairy', respectively. Pilosa is one of the smallest of the orders of the mammal class; its only other suborder contains the anteaters.
The Folivora are divided into at least eight families, only two of which have living species; the remainder are entirely extinct (†):

†Megalocnidae: the Greater Antilles sloths, a basal group that arose about 32 million years ago and became extinct about 5,000 years ago.
Superfamily Megatherioidea
Bradypodidae, the three-toed sloths, contains four extant species:
The brown-throated three-toed sloth (Bradypus variegatus) is the most common of the extant species of sloth, which inhabits the Neotropical realm in the forests of South and Central America.
The pale-throated three-toed sloth (Bradypus tridactylus), which inhabits tropical rainforests in northern South America. It is similar in appearance to, and often confused with, the brown-throated three-toed sloth, which has a much wider distribution. Genetic evidence indicates the two species diverged around six million years ago.
The maned three-toed sloth (Bradypus torquatus), now found only in the Atlantic Forest of southeastern Brazil.
The critically endangered pygmy three-toed sloth (Bradypus pygmaeus) which is endemic to the small island of Isla Escudo de Veraguas off the coast of Panama.
†Megalonychidae: ground sloths that existed for about 35 million years and went extinct about 11,000 years ago. This group was formerly thought to include both the two-toed sloths and the extinct Greater Antilles sloths.
†Megatheriidae: ground sloths that existed for about 23 million years and went extinct about 11,000 years ago; this family included the largest sloths.
†Nothrotheriidae: ground sloths that lived from approximately 11.6 million to 11,000 years ago. As well as ground sloths, this family included Thalassocnus, a genus of either semiaquatic or fully aquatic sloths.
Superfamily Mylodontoidea
Choloepodidae, the two-toed sloths, contains two extant species:
Linnaeus's two-toed sloth (Choloepus didactylus) found in Venezuela, the Guianas, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Brazil north of the Amazon River.
Hoffmann's two-toed sloth (Choloepus hoffmanni) which inhabits tropical forests. It has two separate ranges, split by the Andes. One population is found from eastern Honduras in the north to western Ecuador in the south, and the other in eastern Peru, western Brazil, and northern Bolivia.
†Mylodontidae: ground sloths that existed for about 23 million years and went extinct about 11,000 years ago.
†Scelidotheriidae: collagen sequence data indicates this group is more distant from Mylodon than Choloepus is, so it has been elevated back to full family status.
Evolution
The common ancestor of the two existing sloth genera dates to about 28 million years ago, with similarities between the two- and three-toed sloths an example of convergent evolution to an arboreal lifestyle, "one of the most striking examples of convergent evolution known among mammals". The ancient Xenarthra included a significantly greater variety of species, with a wider distribution, than those of today. Ancient sloths were mostly terrestrial, and some reached sizes that rival those of elephants, as was the case for Megatherium.

Sloths arose in South America during a long period of isolation and eventually spread to a number of the Caribbean islands as well as North America. It is thought that swimming led to oceanic dispersal of pilosans to the Greater Antilles by the Oligocene, and that the megalonychid Pliometanastes and the mylodontid Thinobadistes were able to colonise North America about 9 million years ago, well before the formation of the Isthmus of Panama. The latter development, about 3 million years ago, allowed megatheriids and nothrotheriids to also invade North America as part of the Great American Interchange. Additionally, the nothrotheriid Thalassocnus of the west coast of South America became adapted to a semiaquatic and, eventually, perhaps fully aquatic marine lifestyle. In Peru and Chile, Thalassocnus entered the coastal habitat beginning in the late Miocene. They presumably waded and paddled in the water for short period, but over a span of 4 million years, they eventually evolved into swimming creatures, becoming specialist bottom feeders of seagrasses, similar to the extant sirenians.
Both types of extant tree sloth tend to occupy the same forests; in most areas, a particular species of the somewhat smaller and generally slower-moving three-toed sloth (Bradypus) and a single species of the two-toed type will jointly predominate. Based on morphological comparisons, it was thought the two-toed sloths nested phylogenetically within one of the divisions of the extinct Greater Antilles sloths. Though data has been collected on over 33 different species of sloths by analyzing bone structures, many of the relationships between clades on a phylogenetic tree were unclear. Much of the morphological evidence collected to support the hypothesis of diphyly has been based on the structure of the inner ear.
Recently obtained molecular data from collagen and mitochondrial DNA sequences fall in line with the diphyly (convergent evolution) hypothesis but have overturned some of the other conclusions obtained from morphology. These investigations consistently place two-toed sloths close to mylodontids and three-toed sloths within Megatherioidea, close to Megalonyx, megatheriids and nothrotheriids. They make the previously recognized family Megalonychidae polyphyletic, with both two-toed sloths and Greater Antilles sloths being moved away from Megalonyx. Greater Antilles sloths are now placed in a separate, basal branch of the sloth evolutionary tree.
Phylogeny
The following sloth family phylogenetic tree is based on collagen and mitochondrial DNA sequence data.
Extinctions
The marine sloths of South America's Pacific coast became extinct at the end of the Pliocene following the closing of the Central American Seaway; the closing caused a cooling trend in the coastal waters which killed off much of the area's seagrass (and which would have also made thermoregulation difficult for the sloths, with their slow metabolism).
Ground sloths disappeared from both North and South America shortly after the appearance of humans about 11,000 years ago. Evidence suggests human hunting contributed to the extinction of the American megafauna. Ground sloth remains found in both North and South America indicate that they were killed, cooked, and eaten by humans. Climate change that came with the end of the last ice age may have also played a role, although previous similar glacial retreats were not associated with similar extinction rates.
Megalocnus and some other Caribbean sloths survived until about 5,000 years ago, long after ground sloths had died out on the mainland, but then went extinct when humans finally colonized the Greater Antilles.
BiologyMorphology and anatomy
Sloths can be 60 to 80 cm (24 to 31 in) long and, depending on the species, weigh from 3.6 to 7.7 kg (7.9 to 17.0 lb). Two-toed sloths are slightly larger than three-toed sloths. Sloths have long limbs and rounded heads with tiny ears. Three-toed sloths also have stubby tails about 5 to 6 cm (2.0 to 2.4 in) long.
Sloths are unusual among mammals in not having seven cervical vertebrae. Two-toed sloths have five to seven, while three-toed sloths have eight or nine. The other mammals not having seven are the manatees, with six.
Physiology
Sloths have colour vision but have poor visual acuity. They also have poor hearing. Thus, they rely on their sense of smell and touch to find food.
Sloths have a very low basal or resting metabolic rate (Half of that predicted for a placental mammal of their same body mass), and low body temperatures: 30 to 34 °C (86 to 93 °F) when active, and still lower when resting. Sloths are heterothermic, meaning their body temperature may vary according to the environment, normally ranging from 25 to 35 °C (77 to 95 °F), but able to drop to as low as 20 °C (68 °F), inducing torpor.
Sloths use their forelimbs as their principal mean of propulsion in the trees. Muscle mass of one-sided forelimb makes up 5.1% of total body mass in the brown-throated three-toed sloth and 4.3% in Hoffmann's two-toed sloth; for comparison, muscle mass of one-sided forelimb make up 3.6% in nine-banded armadillo and 3.3% in groundhog. Brown-throated three-toed sloth have a grip strength on the branches equivalent to 99% of their body mass in one side forelimb; for comparison, a Black-capped squirrel monkeys and a Common marmoset have a grip strength equivalent to 74% and 59% of their body mass, respectively. Maximum speed reported for climbing sloths is of 1.6–2.16 km/h (1–1.34 mph) when they are motivated.
Sloth skeletal muscle have very high proportions of oxidative slow twitch (Type I) muscle fibers, with high activity of the anaerobic enzyme CK compared to their other metabolic enzymes despite this. CK activity is low compared with other animals. Their muscle fibers proportion would be an adaptation to consume energy more slowly and their principally anaerobic muscle metabolism would be to use energy production sources faster and cheaper, such as ATP production by CK pathway. This would be a product of their suspensory lifestyle.
The outer hairs of sloth fur grow in a direction opposite from that of other mammals. In most mammals, hairs grow toward the extremities, but because sloths spend so much time with their limbs above their bodies, their hairs grow away from the extremities to provide protection from the elements while they hang upside down. In most conditions, the fur hosts symbiotic algae, which provide camouflage from predatory jaguars, ocelots, and harpy eagles. Because of the algae, sloth fur is a small ecosystem of its own, hosting many species of commensal and parasitic arthropods. There are a large number of arthropods associated with sloths. These include biting and blood-sucking flies such as mosquitoes and sandflies, triatomine bugs, lice, ticks, and mites. Sloths have a highly specific community of commensal beetles, mites, and moths. The species of sloths recorded to host arthropods include the pale-throated three-toed sloth, the brown-throated three-toed sloth, and Linnaeus's two-toed sloth. Sloths benefit from their relationship with moths because the moths are responsible for fertilizing algae on the sloth, which provides them with nutrients.
Activity
Sloth limbs are adapted for hanging and grasping, not for supporting their weight. Muscle mass makes up only 25 to 30 percent of their total body weight. Most other mammals have a muscle mass that makes up 40 to 45 percent of their total body weight. Their specialised hands and feet have long, curved claws to allow them to hang upside down from branches without effort, and are used to drag themselves along the ground, since they cannot walk. On three-toed sloths, the arms are 50 percent longer than the legs.
Sloths move only when necessary and even then, very slowly. They usually move at an average speed of 4 m (13 ft) per minute but can move at a marginally higher speed of 4.5 m (15 ft) per minute if they are in immediate danger from a predator. While they sometimes sit on top of branches, they usually eat, sleep, and even give birth hanging from branches. They sometimes remain hanging from branches even after death. On the ground, the maximum speed of sloths is 3 m (9.8 ft) per minute. Two-toed sloths are generally better able than three-toed sloths to disperse between clumps of trees on the ground.
Sloths are surprisingly strong swimmers and can reach speeds of 13.5 m (44 ft) per minute. They use their long arms to paddle through the water and can cross rivers and swim between islands. Sloths can reduce their already slow metabolism even further and slow their heart rate to less than a third of normal, allowing them to hold their breath underwater for up to 40 minutes.
Wild brown-throated three-toed sloths sleep on average 9.6 hours a day. Two-toed sloths are nocturnal. Three-toed sloths are mostly nocturnal but can be active in the day. They spend 90 percent of their time motionless.
Behavior
Sloths are solitary animals that rarely interact with one another except during breeding season, though female sloths do sometimes congregate, more so than do males.
Sloths descend about once every eight days to defecate on the ground. The reason and mechanism behind this behaviour have long been debated among scientists. There are at least five hypotheses:

To fertilize trees when feces are deposited at the base of the tree,
To cover feces and avoid predation,
To serve as chemical communication between individuals,
To pick up trace nutrients in their claws, that are then ingested, and
To favor a mutualistic relationship with populations of fur moths.
More recently, a new hypothesis has emerged, which presents evidence against the previous ones and proposes that all current sloths are descendants from species that defecated on the ground, and there simply has not been enough selective pressure to abandon this behavior, since cases of predation during defecation are actually very rare.
Diet
Baby sloths learn what to eat by licking the lips of their mother. All sloths eat the leaves of Cecropia.
Two-toed sloths are omnivorous, with a diverse diet of insects, carrion, fruits, leaves, and small lizards, ranging over up to 140 hectares (350 acres). Three-toed sloths, on the other hand, are almost entirely herbivorous (plant eaters), with a limited diet of leaves from only a few trees, and no other mammal digests its food as slowly.
They have made adaptations to arboreal browsing. Leaves, their main food source, provide very little energy or nutrients, and do not digest easily, so sloths have large, slow-acting, multi-chambered stomachs in which symbiotic bacteria break down the tough leaves. As much as two-thirds of a well-fed sloth's body weight consists of the contents of its stomach, and the digestive process can take a month or more to complete.
Three-toed sloths go to the ground to urinate and defecate about once a week, digging a hole and covering it afterwards. They go to the same spot each time and are vulnerable to predation while doing so. Considering the large energy expenditure and dangers involved in the journey to the ground, this behaviour has been described as a mystery. Recent research shows that moths, which live in the sloth's fur, lay eggs in the sloth's feces. When they hatch, the larvae feed on the feces, and when mature fly up onto the sloth above. These moths may have a symbiotic relationship with sloths, as they live in the fur and promote growth of algae, which the sloths eat. Individual sloths tend to spend the bulk of their time feeding on a single "modal" tree; by burying their excreta near the trunk of that tree, they may also help nourish it.
Reproduction
The pale- and brown-throated three-toed sloths mate seasonally, while the maned three-toed sloth breeds at any time of the year. The reproduction of pygmy three-toed sloths is currently unknown. Litters are of one newborn only, after six months' gestation for three-toed, and 12 months for two-toed. Newborns stay with their mother for about five months. In some cases, young sloths die from a fall indirectly because the mothers prove unwilling to leave the safety of the trees to retrieve the young. Females normally bear one baby every year, but sometimes sloths' low level of movement actually keeps females from finding males for longer than one year. Sloths are not particularly sexually dimorphic and several zoos have received sloths of the wrong sex.
The average lifespan of two-toed sloths in the wild is currently unknown due to a lack of full-lifespan studies in a natural environment. Median life expectancy in human care is about 16 years and one individual at the Smithsonian Institution's National Zoo reached an age of 49 years before her death.
Distribution
Although habitat is limited to the tropical rainforests of Central and South America, in that environment sloths are successful. On Barro Colorado Island in Panama, sloths have been estimated to constitute 70 percent of the biomass of arboreal mammals. Four of the six living species are currently rated "least concern"; the maned three-toed sloth (Bradypus torquatus), which inhabits Brazil's dwindling Atlantic Forest, is classified as "vulnerable", while the island-dwelling pygmy three-toed sloth (B. pygmaeus) is critically endangered. Sloths' lower metabolism confines them to the tropics, and they adopt thermoregulation behaviors of cold-blooded animals such as sunning themselves.
Human relations
The majority of recorded sloth deaths in Costa Rica are due to contact with electrical lines and poachers. Their claws also provide another, unexpected deterrent to human hunters; when hanging upside-down in a tree, they are held in place by the claws themselves and often do not fall down even if shot from below.
Sloths are victims of animal trafficking where they are sold as pets. However, they generally make very poor pets, due to their specialized ecology.


Dolly (5 July 1996 – 14 February 2003) was a female Finn-Dorset sheep and the first mammal that was cloned from an adult somatic cell. She was cloned by associates of the Roslin Institute in Scotland, using the process of nuclear transfer from a cell taken from a mammary gland (somatic cell nuclear transfer). Her cloning proved that a cloned organism could be produced from a mature cell from a specific body part. Contrary to popular belief, she was not the first animal to be cloned.
The employment of adult somatic cells instead of embryonic stem cells for cloning emerged from the foundational work of John Gurdon, who cloned African clawed frogs in 1958 with this approach. The successful cloning of Dolly led to advancements in stem cell research, including the discovery of induced pluripotent stem cells.
Dolly lived at the Roslin Institute throughout her life and produced several lambs. She was euthanised at the age of six years due to a progressive lung disease. No cause that linked the disease to her cloning was found.
Dolly's body was preserved and donated by the Roslin Institute in Scotland to the National Museum of Scotland, where it has been regularly exhibited since 2003.
Genesis
Dolly was cloned by Keith Campbell, Ian Wilmut and colleagues at the Roslin Institute, part of the University of Edinburgh, Scotland, and the biotechnology company PPL Therapeutics, based near Edinburgh. The funding for Dolly's cloning was provided by PPL Therapeutics and the Ministry of Agriculture. She was born on 5 July 1996. She has been called "the world's most famous sheep" by sources including BBC News and Scientific American.
The cell used as the donor for the cloning of Dolly was taken from a mammary gland, and the production of a healthy clone, therefore, proved that a cell taken from a specific part of the body could recreate a whole individual. On Dolly's name, Wilmut stated, "Dolly is derived from a mammary gland cell and we couldn't think of a more impressive pair of glands than Dolly Parton's."
Birth
Dolly was born on 5 July 1996 and had three mothers: one provided the egg, another the DNA, and a third carried the cloned embryo to term. She was created using the technique of somatic cell nuclear transfer, where the cell nucleus from an adult cell is transferred into an unfertilised oocyte (developing egg cell) that has had its cell nucleus removed. The hybrid cell is then stimulated to divide by an electric shock, and when it develops into a blastocyst it is implanted in a surrogate mother. Dolly was the first clone produced from a cell taken from an adult mammal. The production of Dolly showed that genes in the nucleus of such a mature differentiated somatic cell are still capable of reverting to an embryonic totipotent state, creating a cell that can then go on to develop into any part of an animal.
Dolly's existence was announced to the public on 22 February 1997. It gained much attention in the media. A commercial with Scottish scientists playing with sheep was aired on TV, and a special report in Time magazine featured Dolly. Science featured Dolly as the breakthrough of the year. Even though Dolly was not the first animal cloned, she received media attention because she was the first cloned from an adult cell.
Life
Dolly lived her entire life at the Roslin Institute in Midlothian. There she was bred with a Welsh Mountain ram and produced six lambs in total. Her first lamb, named Bonnie, was born in April 1998. The following year, Dolly produced twin lambs, Sally and Rosie; further, she gave birth to the triplets Lucy, Darcy and Cotton in 2000. In late 2001, at the age of four, Dolly developed arthritis and started to have difficulty walking. This was treated with anti-inflammatory drugs.
Death
On 14 February 2003, Dolly was euthanised because she had a progressive lung disease and severe arthritis. A Finn Dorset such as Dolly has a life expectancy of around 11 to 12 years, but Dolly lived 6.5 years. A post-mortem examination showed she had a form of lung cancer called ovine pulmonary adenocarcinoma, also known as Jaagsiekte, which is a fairly common disease of sheep and is caused by the retrovirus JSRV. Roslin scientists stated that they did not think there was a connection with Dolly being a clone, and that other sheep in the same flock had died of the same disease. Such lung diseases are a particular danger for sheep kept indoors, and Dolly was made to sleep inside for security reasons.
Some in the press speculated that a contributing factor to Dolly's death was that she could have been born with a genetic age of six years, the same age as the sheep from which she was cloned. One basis for this idea was the finding that Dolly's telomeres were short, which is typically a result of the ageing process. The Roslin Institute stated that intensive health screening did not reveal any abnormalities in Dolly that could have come from advanced aging.
In 2016 scientists reported no defects in thirteen cloned sheep, including four from the same cell line as Dolly. The first study to review the long-term health outcomes of cloning, the authors found no evidence of late-onset, non-communicable diseases other than some minor examples of osteoarthritis and concluded "We could find no evidence, therefore, of a detrimental long-term effect of cloning by SCNT on the health of aged offspring among our cohort."

After her death, Dolly's body was preserved via taxidermy and is currently on display at the National Museum of Scotland in Edinburgh.
Legacy
After cloning was successfully demonstrated through the production of Dolly, many other large mammals were cloned, including pigs, deer, horses and cattle. The attempt to clone argali (mountain sheep) did not produce viable embryos. The attempt to clone a banteng bull was more successful, as were the attempts to clone mouflon (a form of wild sheep), both resulting in viable offspring. The reprogramming process that cells need to go through during cloning is not perfect and embryos produced by nuclear transfer often show abnormal development. Making cloned mammals was highly inefficient in 1996; Dolly was the only lamb that survived to adulthood from 277 attempts. Wilmut, who led the team that created Dolly, announced in 2007 that the nuclear transfer technique may never be sufficiently efficient for use in humans. But by 2014, Chinese scientists were reported to have 70–80% success rates in cloning pigs, and in 2016 Sooam Biotech was producing 500 cloned embryos a day. Another commercial pet cloning company, Viagen, charges $50,000 (£38,000) to clone a dog, $30,000 for a cat, and $85,000 for a horse, showing cloning economy is getting more popular.
Cloning may have uses in preserving endangered species, and may become a viable tool for reviving extinct species. In January 2009, scientists from the Centre of Food Technology and Research of Aragon in northern Spain announced the cloning of the Pyrenean ibex, a form of wild mountain goat, which was officially declared extinct in 2000. Although the newborn ibex died shortly after birth due to physical defects in its lungs, it is the first time an extinct animal has been cloned, and may open doors for saving endangered and newly extinct species by resurrecting them from frozen tissue.
In July 2016, four identical clones of Dolly (Daisy, Debbie, Dianna and Denise) were alive and healthy at nine years old. They were euthanised following research published in 2017.
Scientific American concluded in 2016 that the main legacy of Dolly has not been cloning of animals but in advances into stem cell research. Gene targeting was added in 2000, when researchers cloned the female lamb Diana from sheep DNA altered to contain the human gene for alpha 1-antitrypsin. The human gene was specifically activated in the ewe’s mammary gland, so Diana produced milk containing human alpha 1-antitrypsin. After Dolly, researchers realised that ordinary cells could be reprogrammed to induced pluripotent stem cells, which can be grown into any tissue.
The first successful cloning of a primate species was reported in January 2018, using the same method which produced Dolly. Two identical clones of a macaque monkey, Zhong Zhong and Hua Hua, were created by researchers in China and were born in late 2017.
In January 2019, scientists in China reported the creation of five identical cloned gene-edited monkeys, again using this method, and the gene-editing CRISPR-Cas9 technique allegedly used by He Jiankui in creating the first ever gene-modified human babies, Lulu and Nana. The monkey clones were made in order to study several medical diseases.
In popular culture
The Brazilian telenovela O Clone (2001) drew inspiration for its central plot from the cloning of Dolly, exploring the subject of human cloning through the character played by Murilo Benício, the story's protagonist. The production is one of the major successes of its creator, Glória Perez.
In 2003 the Belgian artist Dominique Goblet published a short comic strip about Dolly with the title: "2004 Apparition de Dolly dans la campagne anglaise".


Various non-human animal species exhibit behavior that can be interpreted as homosexual or bisexual, often referred to as same-sex sexual behavior (SSSB) by scientists. This may include same-sex sexual activity, courtship, affection, pair bonding, and parenting among same-sex animal pairs. Various forms of this are found among a variety of vertebrate and arthropod taxonomic classes. The sexual behavior of non-human animals takes many different forms, even within the same species, though homosexual behavior is best known from social species.
Scientists observe same-sex sexual behavior in animals in different degrees and forms among different species and clades. A 2019 paper states that it has been observed in over 1,500 species. Although same-sex interactions involving genital contact have been reported in many animal species, they are routinely manifested in only a few, including humans. Other than humans, the only known species to exhibit exclusive homosexual orientation is the domesticated sheep (Ovis aries), involving about 10% of males. The motivations for and implications of these behaviors are often lensed through anthropocentric thinking; Bruce Bagemihl states that any hypothesis is "necessarily an account of human interpretations of these phenomena".
Proposed causes for same-sex sexual behavior vary across species. Theories include mistaken identity (especially for arthropods), sexually antagonistic selection, balancing selection, practice of behaviors needed for reproduction, expression of social dominance or submission, and social bonding. Genetic, hormonal, and neurological variations as a basis for individual behavioral differences within species have been proposed, and same-sex sexual behavior has been induced in laboratory animals by these means.
In relation to humansApplying the term homosexual to animals
The term homosexual was coined by the Hungarian writer and campaigner Karl Maria Kertbeny in 1868 to describe same-sex sexual attraction and sexual behavior in humans. Its use in animal studies has been controversial for two main reasons: animal sexuality and motivating factors have been and remain poorly understood, and the term has strong cultural implications in western society that are irrelevant for species other than humans. Thus homosexual behavior has been given a number of terms over the years. According to Bagemihl, when describing animals, the term homosexual is preferred over gay, lesbian, and other terms currently in use, as these are seen as even more bound to human homosexuality.

Bailey et al. says:Homosexual: in animals, this has been used to refer to same-sex behavior that is not sexual in character (e.g. 'homosexual tandem running' in termites), same-sex courtship or copulatory behavior occurring over a short period of time (e.g. 'homosexual mounting' in cockroaches and rams) or long-term pair bonds between same-sex     partners that might involve any combination of courting, copulating, parenting and affectional behaviors (e.g. 'homosexual pair bonds' in gulls). In humans, the term is used to describe individual sexual behaviors as well as long-term relationships, but in some usages connotes a gay or lesbian social identity. Scientific writing would benefit from reserving this anthropomorphic term for humans and not using it to describe behavior in other animals, because of its deeply rooted context in human society.Animal preference and motivation is always inferred from behavior. In wild animals, researchers will not be able to map the entire life of an individual, and must infer from frequency of single observations of behavior. The correct usage of the term homosexual is that an animal exhibits homosexual behavior or even same-sex sexual behavior; however, this article conforms to the usage by modern research, applying the term homosexuality to all sexual behavior (copulation, genital stimulation, mating games and sexual display behavior) between animals of the same sex. In most instances, it is presumed that the homosexual behavior is but part of the animal's overall sexual behavioral repertoire, making the animal "bisexual" rather than "homosexual" as the terms are commonly understood in humans.
Nature
The observation of homosexual behavior in animals can be seen as both an argument for and against the acceptance of homosexuality in humans, and has been used especially against the claim that it is a peccatum contra naturam ("sin against nature"). For instance, homosexuality in animals was cited by the American Psychological Association and other groups in their amici curiae brief to the United States Supreme Court in Lawrence v. Texas, which ultimately struck down the sodomy laws of 14 states.
Research
A majority of the research available concerning homosexual behavior in animals lacks specification between animals that exclusively exhibit same-sex tendencies and those that participate in heterosexual and homosexual mating activities interchangeably. This lack of distinction has led to differing opinions and conflicting interpretations of collected data amongst scientists and researchers. For instance, Bruce Bagemihl, author of the book Biological Exuberence: Animal Homosexuality and Natural Diversity, emphasizes that there are no anatomical or endocrinological differences between exclusively homosexual and exclusively heterosexual animal pairs. However, if the definition of "homosexual behavior" is made to include animals that participate in both same-sex and opposite-sex mating activities, hormonal differences have been documented among key sex hormones, such as testosterone and estradiol, when compared to those who participate solely in heterosexual mating.
Many of the animals used in laboratory-based studies of homosexuality do not appear to spontaneously exhibit these tendencies often in the wild. Such behavior is often elicited and exaggerated by the researcher during experimentation through the destruction of a portion of brain tissue, or by exposing the animal to high levels of steroid hormones prenatally. Information gathered from these studies is limited when applied to spontaneously occurring same-sex behavior in animals outside of the laboratory.
Homosexual behaviour in animals has been discussed since classical antiquity. The earliest written mention of animal homosexuality appears to date back to 2,300 years ago, when Aristotle (384–322 BC) described copulation between pigeons, partridges and quails of the same sex. The Hieroglyphics of Horapollo, written in the 4th century AD by the Egyptian writer Horapollo, mentions "hermaphroditism" in hyenas and homosexuality in partridges. The first review of animal homosexuality was written by the zoologist Ferdinand Karsch-Haack in 1900.
Academic research into the ubiquity of same-sex sexual behavior was not carried out on a large scale, possibly due to observer bias caused by social attitudes to same-sex sexual behavior, innocent confusion, lack of interest, distaste, scientists fearing loss of their grants or even from a fear of "being ridiculed by their colleagues". Georgetown University biologist Janet Mann states "Scientists who study the topic are often accused of trying to forward an agenda, and their work can come under greater scrutiny than that of their colleagues who study other topics." They also noted "Not every sexual act has a reproductive function ... that's true of humans and non-humans." Studies have demonstrated homosexual behavior in a number of species, but the true extent of homosexuality in animals is not known.

Some researchers believe this behavior to have its origin in male social organization and social dominance, similar to the dominance traits shown in prison sexuality. Others, particularly Bagemihl, Joan Roughgarden, Thierry Lodé and Paul Vasey suggest the social function of sex (both homosexual and heterosexual) is not necessarily connected to dominance, but serves to strengthen alliances and social ties within a flock. While reports on many such mating scenarios are still only anecdotal, a growing body of scientific work confirms that permanent homosexuality occurs not only in species with permanent pair bonds, but also in non-monogamous species like sheep. One report on sheep found that 8% of rams exhibited homosexual preferences—that is, even when given a choice, they chose male over female partners. In fact, apparent homosexual individuals are known from all of the traditional domestic species, from sheep, cattle and horses to cats, dogs and budgerigars. In October 2023, biologists reported  studies of animals (over 1,500 different species) that found same-sex behavior (not necessarily related to human orientation) may help improve social stability by reducing conflict within the groups studied.
Basis
Sexual behaviors often require a significant energy investment. When sexual behaviors produce offspring, there is an obvious benefit for the animal. However, the benefit from performing homosexual behaviors (which cannot result in the production of offspring) is less obvious, and some scientists have called it a "Darwinian paradox" because it is non-reproductive. A number of non-exclusive different explanations for the emergence of such traits have been put forward.
Physiological basis
A definite physiological explanation or reason for homosexual activity in animal species has not been agreed upon by researchers in the field. Numerous scholars are of the opinion that varying levels (either higher or lower) of the sex hormones in the animal, in addition to the size of the animal's gonads, play a direct role in the sexual behavior and preference exhibited by that animal. Others firmly argue no evidence to support these claims exists when comparing animals of a specific species exhibiting homosexual behavior exclusively and those that do not. Ultimately, empirical support from comprehensive endocrinological studies exist for both interpretations. Researchers found no evidence of differences in the measurements of the gonads, or the levels of the sex hormones of exclusively homosexual western gulls and ring-billed gulls.
Additional studies pertaining to hormone involvement in homosexual behavior indicate that when administering treatments of testosterone and estradiol to female heterosexual animals, the elevated hormone levels increase the likelihood of homosexual behavior. Additionally, boosting the levels of sex hormones during an animal's pregnancy appears to increase the likelihood of it birthing a homosexual offspring.
Genetic basis
Researchers found that disabling the fucose mutarotase (FucM) gene in laboratory mice – which influences the levels of estrogen to which the brain is exposed – caused the female mice to behave as if they were male as they grew up. "The mutant female mouse underwent a slightly altered developmental programme in the brain to resemble the male brain in terms of sexual preference" said professor Chankyu Park of the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology in Daejon, South Korea, who led the research. His findings were published in the BMC Genetics journal on July 7, 2010. Another study found that by manipulating a gene in fruit flies (Drosophila), homosexual behavior appeared to have been induced. However, in addition to homosexual behavior, several abnormal behaviors were also exhibited apparently due to this mutation.
Neurobiological basis
In March 2011, research showed that serotonin is involved in the mechanism of sexual orientation of mice. A study conducted on fruit flies found that inhibiting the dopamine neurotransmitter inhibited lab-induced homosexual behavior.
Other hypotheses
One proposal for the adaptive function of homosexual behavior is the formation of alliances and mutual social benefit to the animals. Studies support this in specific species, such as black swans, where a quarter of mate pairs consist of two males, who mate with a female and chase her away once she lays the egg, then raise it themselves. These M-M pairs have great success in defending their territory and resources, and keep their young alive until fledgling 80% of the time, compared to 30% for M-F pairs.
Studies done on homosexual behavior in birds showed a negative correlation between a species' relative parental investment and F-F homosexual behaviors, i.e. in species whose females invested more time and care into their young relative to males, F-F sexual encounters happened less often. Similarly, there was a negative correlation between relative parental investment and M-M homosexual behaviors. This meant that species exhibiting a high degree of polygamy (where females often are the exclusive caretakers of the young) F-F sexual behaviors were very rare, whereas in a socially monogamous species (in which a M-F pair works together to care for young) they were much more common. The trend was opposite for males, in polygamous species M-M sexual behaviors were quite common and in socially monogamous species they were rare. The study argues that release from parental care, a very energy intensive investment, allows the opportunities for homosexual behaviors to be exhibited, and higher parental care prevents homosexual behaviors from occurring because of the energy cost of the behaviors.
A 2019 paper hypothesized that when sex first began to evolve, there was no distinction between homosexuality and heterosexuality, and animals mated with other members of their species indiscriminately. This is a contrast to most perspectives, which try to find explanations for the evolution of homosexual behaviors and separate it completely from the evolution of heterosexual behaviors. The study states that it is unlikely that sexual behaviors evolved simultaneously to the evolution of traits necessary to recognize a compatible sexual mate, such as size, shape, odor, and color. As those secondary sex characteristics evolved, sexuality would have become more discriminatory, leading to less homosexuality, but homosexual behaviors would rarely have had enough cost to be selected against and removed entirely from a population. Additionally, the cost of homosexual behavior would be offset by the cost of mate recognition, which requires psychological adaptations, and excessive discrimination in mate choice can lead to missing out of mating opportunities. With indiscriminate mating, these factors are irrelevant. The paper notes that in some species, especially where survival is very difficult and each energy-related decision could mean the animal's death, homosexual behavior would be strongly selected against, leading to strictly heterosexual species.
Some select species and groupsBirdsBlack swans
An estimated one-quarter of all black swan pairings are of males. They steal nests, or form temporary threesomes with females to obtain eggs, driving away the female after she lays the eggs. The males spent time in each other's society, guarded the common territory, performed greeting ceremonies before each other, and (in the reproductive period) pre-marital rituals, and if one of the birds tried to sit on the other, an intense fight began. More of their cygnets survive to adulthood than those of different-sex pairs, possibly due to their superior ability to defend large portions of land. The same reasoning has been applied to male flamingo pairs raising chicks.
Albatrosses
Female Laysan albatrosses, on the north-western tip of the island of Oahu, Hawaii, form pairs for co-growing offspring. On the observed island, the number of females considerably exceeds the number of males (59% N=102/172), so 31% of females, after mating with males, create partnerships for hatching and feeding chicks. Compared to male-female couples, female-female partnerships have a lower hatching rate (87% vs 41%) and lower overall reproductive success (67% vs 31%).
Warming waters from climate change have led to increased foraging times and thus increased mortality among female black-browed albatrosses on the Antipodes Islands in New Zealand. The skewed gender imbalance has led to many male albatrosses forming homosexual relationships. Male-male pairs now comprise between 2–5% of the albatross population on the islands.
Blue ducks
In 2009, a UK-based captive breeding program for blue ducks (involving two males and one female) was derailed when the two males paired with each other instead of with the female that they were assigned to mate with.
Ibises
Research has shown that the environmental pollutant methylmercury can increase the prevalence of homosexual behavior in male American white ibis. The study involved exposing chicks in varying dosages to the chemical and measuring the degree of homosexual behavior in adulthood. The results discovered was that as the dosage was increased the likelihood of homosexual behavior also increased. The endocrine blocking feature of mercury has been suggested as a possible cause of sexual disruption in other bird species.
Mallards
Mallards form male-female pairs only until the female lays eggs, at which time the male leaves the female. Mallards have rates of male-male sexual activity that are unusually high for birds, in some cases, as high as 19% of all pairs in a population. Kees Moeliker of the Natural History Museum Rotterdam has observed one male mallard engage in homosexual necrophilia.
Penguins
Penguins have been observed to engage in homosexual behaviour since at least as early as 1911. George Murray Levick, who documented this behaviour in Adélie penguins at Cape Adare, described it as "depraved". The report was considered too shocking for public release at the time, and was suppressed. The only copies that were made available privately to researchers had the English text partly written in Greek letters, to prevent this knowledge becoming more widely known. The report was unearthed only a century later, and published in Polar Record in June 2012.
In early February 2004, The New York Times reported that Roy and Silo, a male pair of chinstrap penguins in the Central Park Zoo in New York City, had successfully hatched and fostered a female chick from a fertile egg they had been given to incubate. Other penguins in New York zoos have also been reported to have formed same-sex pairs.
In Odense Zoo in Denmark, a pair of male king penguins adopted an egg that had been abandoned by a female, proceeding to incubate it and raise the chick.
Zoos in Japan and Germany have also documented homosexual male penguin couples. The couples have been shown to build nests together and use a stone as a substitute for an egg. Researchers at Rikkyo University in Tokyo found 20 homosexual pairs at 16 major aquariums and zoos in Japan.
The Bremerhaven Zoo in Germany attempted to encourage reproduction of endangered Humboldt penguins by importing females from Sweden and separating three male pairs, but this was unsuccessful. The zoo's director said that the relationships were "too strong" between the homosexual pairs. German gay groups protested at this attempt to break up the male-male pairs but the zoo's director was reported as saying "We don't know whether the three male pairs are really homosexual or whether they have just bonded because of a shortage of females ... nobody here wants to forcibly separate homosexual couples."
A pair of male Magellanic penguins at the San Francisco Zoo shared a burrow for six years and raised a surrogate chick; the pair split when the male of a pair in the next burrow died and the female sought a new mate.
Buddy and Pedro, a pair of male African penguins, were separated by the Toronto Zoo to mate with female penguins in 2011. Buddy has since paired off with a female.
Suki and Chupchikoni are two female African penguins that pair bonded at the Ramat Gan Safari in Israel in 2013. Chupchikoni was assumed to be male until her blood was tested.
Jumbs and Kermit, two male Humboldt penguins at Wingham Wildlife Park, were given an egg from heterosexual couple Hurricane and Isobel. The egg failed to hatch. However, they were given another abandoned egg from the same couple which successfully hatched on 12 April 2014.
As of 2018, two female King penguins at Kelly Tarltons in Auckland, New Zealand, called Thelma and Louise (named after the 1991 film) have been in a relationship for eight years, when most of the other eligible penguins switch partners each mating season, regardless of their orientation. The two penguins were both taking care of an egg that Thelma laid, but is unknown whether it was fertilized.
Sphen and Magic, two male gentoo penguins in Sea Life Sydney Aquarium, paired in 2018 and went on to raise two chicks, Lara (formerly Sphengic) and Clancy. Sphen died in 2024.
In September 2018 at Odense Zoo in Denmark, a male penguin couple took a chick from a heterosexual couple while they were swimming. Zoo staff speculated that the couple saw the biological parents as neglectful of the chick. The biological parents later confronted the couple and zoo staff returned the chick to them.
Marama and Rocky, two female gentoo penguins at Sea Life London Aquarium, had an "incredibly strong bond" for five years prior to adopting a chick who was born in June 2019. The chick was intentionally not gendered and was given a gender-neutral purple band for identification purposes. They were still a couple in 2021.
Skipper and Ping, two male penguins at Berlin Zoo, adopted an abandoned egg in July 2019.
A female penguin couple named Electra and Viola adopted, incubated and raised an egg from another couple at L'Oceanogràfic in Valencia in 2020.
A second same-sex female couple, Marmalade and Chickpea, formed at Sea Life London during the 2021 mating season.
Vultures
In 1998, two male griffon vultures named Dashik and Yehuda, at the Jerusalem Biblical Zoo, engaged in "open and energetic sex" and built a nest. The keepers provided the couple with an artificial egg, which the two parents took turns incubating, and 45 days later, the zoo replaced the egg with a baby vulture. The two male vultures raised the chick together. A few years later, however, Yehuda became interested in a female vulture that was brought into the aviary. Dashik became depressed, and was eventually moved to the zoological research garden at Tel Aviv University where he too set up a nest with a female vulture.
Two male vultures at the Allwetter Zoo in Muenster built a nest together, although they were picked on and their nest materials were often stolen by other vultures. They were eventually separated to try to promote breeding by placing one of them with female vultures, despite the protests of German homosexual groups.
Pigeons
Both male and female pigeons sometimes exhibit homosexual behavior. In addition to sexual behavior, same-sex pigeon pairs will build nests, and hens will lay (infertile) eggs and attempt to incubate them.
MammalsAmerican bison
Courtship, mounting, and full anal penetration between bulls has been noted to occur among American bison. The Mandan nation Okipa festival concludes with a ceremonial enactment of this behavior, to "ensure the return of the buffalo in the coming season". Also, mounting of one female by another (known as "bulling") is extremely common among cattle. The behaviour is hormone driven and synchronizes with the emergence of estrus (heat), particularly in the presence of a bull.
Bats
More than 20 species of bat have been documented to engage in homosexual behavior. Bat species that have been observed engaging in homosexual behavior in the wild include:

Bat species that have been observed engaging in homosexual behavior in captivity include the Comoro flying fox (Pteropus livingstonii), the Rodrigues flying fox (Pteropus rodricensis) and the common vampire bat (Desmodus rotundus).
Homosexual behavior in bats has been categorized into 6 groups: mutual homosexual grooming and licking, homosexual masturbation, homosexual play, homosexual mounting, coercive sex, and cross-species homosexual sex.
In the wild, the grey-headed flying fox (Pteropus poliocephalus) engages in allogrooming wherein one partner licks and gently bites the chest and wing membrane of the other partner. Both sexes display this form of mutual homosexual grooming and it is more common in males. Males often have erect penises while they are mutually grooming each other. Like opposite-sex grooming partners, same-sex grooming partners continuously utter a "pre-copulation call", which is described as a "pulsed grating call", while engaged in this activity.
In wild Bonin flying foxes (Pteropus pselaphon), males perform fellatio or 'male-male genital licking' on other males. Male–male genital licking events occur repeatedly several times in the same pair, and reciprocal genital licking also occurs. The male-male genital licking in these bats is considered a sexual behavior. Allogrooming in Bonin flying foxes has never been observed, hence the male-male genital licking in this species does not seem to be a byproduct of allogrooming, but rather a behavior of directly licking the male genital area, independent of allogrooming. In captivity, same-sex genital licking has been observed among males of the Comoro flying fox (Pteropus livingstonii) as well as among males of the common vampire bat (Desmodus rotundus).
In wild Indian flying foxes (Pteropus giganteus), males often mount one another, with erections and thrusting, while play-wrestling. One observation of males engaged in "homosexual fellatio" has also been recorded. Males of the long-fingered bat (Myotis capaccinii) have been observed in the same position of male-female mounting, with one gripping the back of the other. A similar behavior was also observed in the common bent-wing bat (Miniopterus schreibersii).
In wild little brown bats (Myotis lucifugus), males often mount other males (and females) during late autumn and winter, when many of the mounted individuals are torpid. 35% of matings during this period are homosexual. These coercive copulations usually include ejaculation and the mounted bat often makes a typical copulation call consisting of a long squawk. Similarly, in hibernacula of the common noctule (Nyctalus noctula), active males were observed to wake up from lethargy on a warm day and engage in mating with lethargic males and (active or lethargic) females. The lethargic males, like females, called out loudly and presented their buccal glands with opened mouth during copulation.
Vesey-Fitzgerald (1949) observed homosexual behaviours in all 12 British bat species known at the time: "Homosexuality is common in the spring in all species, and, since the males are in full possession of their powers, I suspect throughout the summer...I have even seen homosexuality between Natterer's and Daubenton's bats (Myotis nattereri and M. daubentonii)."
CetaceansAmazon dolphins
The Amazon river dolphin or boto has been reported to form up in bands of 3–5 individuals engaging in sexual activity. The groups usually comprise young males and sometimes one or two females. Sex is often performed in non-reproductive ways, using snout, flippers and genital rubbing, without regard to gender. In captivity, they have been observed to sometimes perform homosexual and heterosexual penetration of the blowhole, a hole homologous with the nostril of other mammals, making this the only known example of nasal sex in the animal kingdom. The males will sometimes also perform sex with males from the tucuxi species, a type of small porpoise.
Bottlenose dolphins
Dolphins of several species engage in homosexual acts, though it is best studied in the bottlenose dolphins. Sexual encounters between females take the shape of "beak-genital propulsion", where one female inserts her beak in the genital opening of the other while swimming gently forward. Between males, homosexual behaviour includes rubbing of genitals against each other, which sometimes leads to the males swimming belly to belly, inserting the penis in the other's genital slit and sometimes anus.
Janet Mann, Georgetown University professor of biology and psychology, argues that the strong personal behavior among male dolphin calves is about bond formation and benefits the species in an evolutionary context. She cites studies showing that these dolphins later in life as adults are in a sense bisexual, and the male bonds forged earlier in life work together for protection as well as locating females to reproduce with. Confrontations between flocks of bottlenose dolphins and the related species Atlantic spotted dolphin will sometimes lead to cross-species homosexual behaviour between the males rather than combat.
Humpback whales
In 2022, photographers captured the first-ever images of humpback whales mating, both of which were males, off the coast of Maui, Hawaii. The whales were observed for 30 minutes, with one whale using its penis to penetrate the genital slit of the other.
Southern right whales
During the 2024 whale spotting season, photographers off the coast of Maldonado in Uruguay recorded a total of four events of non-reproductive sexual activity amongst male southern right whales, which make up the first audiovisual record in which penetration of the genital slit occurs between adult males. The situations in which these interactions occurred were varied and mostly involved groups of three male right whales.
Elephants
African and Asian male elephants will engage in same-sex bonding and mounting. Such encounters are often associated with affectionate interactions, such as kissing, trunk intertwining, and placing trunks in each other's mouths. Male elephants, who often live apart from the general herd, often form "companionships", consisting of an older individual and one or sometimes two younger males with sexual behavior being an important part of the social dynamic. Unlike heterosexual relations, which are always of a fleeting nature, the relationships between males may last for years. The encounters are analogous to heterosexual bouts, one male often extending his trunk along the other's back and pushing forward with his tusks to signify his intention to mount. Same-sex relations are common and frequent in both sexes, with Asiatic elephants in captivity devoting roughly 45% of sexual encounters to same-sex activity.
Giraffes
Male giraffes have been observed to engage in remarkably high frequencies of homosexual behavior. After aggressive "necking", it is common for two male giraffes to caress and court each other, leading up to mounting and climax. Such interactions between males have been found to be more frequent than heterosexual coupling. In one study, up to 94% of observed mounting incidents took place between two males. The proportion of same sex activities varied between 30 and 75%, and at any given time one in twenty males were engaged in non-combative necking behavior with another male. Only 1% of same-sex mounting incidents occurred between females.
Marmots
Homosexual behavior is quite common in wild marmots. In Olympic marmots (Marmota olympus) and hoary marmots (Marmota caligata), females often mount other females as well as engage in other affectionate and sexual behaviors with females of the same species. They display a high frequency of these behaviors especially when they are in heat. A homosexual encounter often begins with a greeting interaction in which one female nuzzles her nose on the other female's cheek or mouth, or both females touch noses or mouths. Additionally, a female may gently chew on the ear or neck of her partner, who responds by raising her tail. The first female may sniff the other's genital region or nuzzle that region with her mouth. She may then proceed to mount the other female, during which the mounting female gently grasps the mounted female's dorsal neck fur in her jaws while thrusting. The mounted female arches her back and holds her tail to one side to facilitate their sexual interaction.
Lions
Both male and female lions have been seen to interact homosexually. Male lions pair-bond for a number of days and initiate homosexual activity with affectionate nuzzling and caressing, leading to mounting and thrusting. About 8% of mountings have been observed to occur with other males. Pairings between females are held to be fairly common in captivity but have not been observed in the wild.
Polecats
European polecats (Mustela putorius) were found to engage homosexually with non-sibling animals. Exclusive homosexuality with mounting and anal penetration in this solitary species serves no apparent adaptive function.
Primates
Same-sex sexual behaviors have been observed in New World monkeys, Old World monkeys, and apes. These behaviors are much more common in Old World monkeys than New World monkeys, and all ape genera have been observed engaging in same-sex sexual behavior. Prosimians have not been observed engaging in same-sex sexual behavior. Same-sex mounting, for instance, has been observed in 16% of New World primate genera. In contrast, 76% of Old World monkey genera contain at least one species that has been observed in male-male mounts, and 70% of genera for female-female mounts. Same-sex mounting has been observed in all ape genera. Same-sex sexual behaviors likely evolved following the divergence of New World monkeys; these behaviors are a conserved trait among Old World monkeys and apes. Among Old World monkeys, same-sex genital interactions are much more common in multi-male systems as opposed to uni-male systems.
Bonobos
Bonobos form a matriarchal society, unusual among apes. They are fully bisexual: both males and females engage in hetero- and homosexual behavior, being noted for female–female sex in particular, including between juveniles and adults. Roughly 60% of all bonobo sexual activity occurs between two or more females. While the homosexual bonding system in bonobos represents the highest frequency of homosexuality known in any primate species, homosexuality has been reported for all great apes, as well as a number of other primate species.
Dutch primatologist Frans de Waal, who extensively observed and filmed bonobos, believed that sexual activity is the bonobo's way of avoiding conflict. Anything that arouses the interest of more than one bonobo at a time, not just food, tends to result in sexual contact. If two bonobos approach a cardboard box thrown into their enclosure, they will briefly mount each other before playing with the box. Such situations lead to squabbles in most other species. But bonobos are quite tolerant, perhaps because they use sex to divert attention and to defuse tension.
Bonobo sex often occurs in aggressive contexts totally unrelated to food. A jealous male might chase another away from a female, after which the two males reunite and engage in scrotal rubbing. Or after a female hits a juvenile, the latter's mother may lunge at the aggressor, an action that is immediately followed by genital rubbing between the two adults.
Chimpanzees
Compared to bonobos, less research has been conducted on same-sex sexual behaviors in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). In contrast to bonobos, same-sex sexual behaviors are less common in Kibale chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes schweinfurthii) and primarily occur between adult males. While less frequent than in female bonobos, same-sex sexual behaviors between male chimpanzees occur regularly and in a variety of contexts. Female chimpanzees are much less likely to engage in same-sex sexual behaviors than males.
Gibbons
There is one published study of same-sex sexual behavior in white-handed gibbons (Hylobates lar). The authors report on observations of an adult male mounting an adolescent male. In gibbons, same-sex sexual behavior is likely rare.
Gorillas
Both male and female mountain gorillas (Gorilla gorilla beringei) have been observed engaging in same-sex sexual behaviors. Homosexual behavior among male gorillas has been studied. This behavior occurs more often in all-male bachelor packs in the wild and it is believed to play a role in social bonding. Homosexual behavior among female mountain gorillas has also been documented. Among all-male "bachelor" groups, same-sex sexual interactions are extremely common. Female mountain gorillas engage in same-sex sexual behaviors frequently as well and coincided in prevalence in accordance with intersexual copulations as well. As opposed to conferring social status, same-sex sexual behaviors are likely reflective of elevated arousal in female mountain gorillas. Same-sex sexual behaviors are natural and common among mountain gorillas.
Orangutans
Homosexual behavior forms part of the natural repertoire of sexual or sociosexual behavior of orangutans. Male homosexual behavior occurs both in the wild and in captivity, and it occurs in both adolescent and mature individuals. Homosexual behavior in orangutans is not an artifact of captivity or contact with humans.
Sociosexual behaviors among orangutans (Pongo spp.) are extremely common and invoke a variety of evolutionary strategies. However, only one study of same-sex sexual behavior has been published. In Sumatran orangutans (Pongo abelii), same-sex sexual behavior has been documented among two dyads of unflanged adolescent males. Oral contact with genitals and behavior similar to male-female forced copulation between sexually mature sub-adult males were observed. These behaviors were observed without captivity or contact with humans being involved. The observation of male orangutan sexual behavior was reported as a natural repertoire of sexual or sociosexual behavior and was not found to be rare or uncommon.
Monkeys
Among monkeys, Lionel Tiger and Robin Fox conducted a study on how Depo-Provera contraceptives lead to decreased male attraction to females.  Many monkeys were observed exhibiting same-sex sexual behavior.
With the Japanese macaque, also known as the "snow monkey", same-sex relations are frequent, though rates vary between troops. Females will form "consortships" characterized by affectionate social and sexual activities. In some troops up to one quarter of the females form such bonds, which vary in duration from a few days to a few weeks. Often, strong and lasting friendships result from such pairings. Males also have same-sex relations, typically with multiple partners of the same age. Affectionate and playful activities are associated with such relations.
Male same-sex behavior has been found to be common in a colony of the Rhesus macaque. It seems to be involved in social bonding, with individual differences in such behavior found to be heritable.
Sheep
Ovis aries, the common domesticated sheep, has attracted much attention due to the fact that around 8–10% of rams have an exclusive homosexual orientation. Such rams prefer to court and mount other rams only, even in the presence of estrous ewes. Moreover, around 18–22% of rams are bisexual.
Several observations indicate that male–male sexual preference in rams is sexually motivated. Rams routinely perform the same courtship behaviors (including foreleg kicks, nudges, vocalizations, anogenital sniffs and flehmen) prior to mounting other males as observed when other rams court and mount estrous females. Furthermore, pelvic thrusting and ejaculation often accompany same-sex mounts by rams.
Spotted hyenas
The family structure of the spotted hyena is matriarchal, and dominance relationships with strong sexual elements are routinely observed between related females. Due largely to the female spotted hyena's unique urogenital system, which looks more like a penis rather than a vagina, early naturalists thought hyenas were hermaphroditic males who commonly practiced homosexuality. Early writings such as Ovid's Metamorphoses and the Physiologus suggested that the hyena continually changed its sex and nature from male to female and back again. In Paedagogus, Clement of Alexandria noted that the hyena (along with the hare) was "quite obsessed with sexual intercourse". Many Europeans associated the hyena with sexual deformity, prostitution, deviant sexual behavior, and even witchcraft.
The reality behind the confusing reports is the sexually aggressive behavior between the females, including mounting between females. Research has shown that "in contrast to most other female mammals, female Crocuta are male-like in appearance, larger than males, and substantially more aggressive," and they have "been masculinized without being defeminized".
Study of this unique genitalia and aggressive behavior in the female hyena has led to the understanding that more aggressive females are better able to compete for resources, including food and mating partners. Research has shown that "elevated levels of testosterone in utero" contribute to extra aggressiveness; both males and females mount members of both the same and opposite sex, who in turn are possibly acting more submissive because of lower levels of testosterone in utero.
ReptilesLizards
Several species of whiptail lizard (especially in the genus Aspidoscelis) consist only of females that have the ability to reproduce through parthenogenesis. Females engage in sexual behavior to stimulate ovulation, with their behavior following their hormonal cycles; during low levels of estrogen, these (female) lizards engage in "masculine" sexual roles. Those animals with currently high estrogen levels assume "feminine" sexual roles. Some parthenogenetic lizards that perform the courtship ritual have greater fertility than those kept in isolation due to an increase in hormones triggered by the sexual behaviors. So, even though asexual whiptail lizards populations lack males, sexual stimuli still increase reproductive success. From an evolutionary standpoint, these females are passing their full genetic code to all of their offspring (rather than the 50% of genes that would be passed in sexual reproduction). Certain species of gecko also reproduce by parthenogenesis.
Some species of sexually reproducing geckos have also been found to display homosexual behavior, e.g. the day geckos Phelsuma laticauda and Phelsuma cepediana.
Tortoises
Jonathan, the world's oldest tortoise (an Aldabra giant tortoise), had been mating with another tortoise named Frederica since 1991. In 2017, it was discovered that Frederica was actually probably male all along, and was renamed Frederic.
Insects and arachnids
There is evidence of same-sex sexual behavior in at least 110 species of insects and arachnids. Scharf et al. says: "Males are more frequently involved in same-sex sexual (SSS)  behavior in the laboratory than in the field, and isolation, high density, and exposure to female pheromones increase its prevalence. SSS behavior is often shorter than the equivalent heterosexual behavior. Most cases can be explained via mistaken identification by the active (courting/mounting) male. Passive males often resist courting/mating attempts".
Scharf et al. continues: "SSS behavior has been reported in most insect orders, and Bagemihl (1999) provides a list of ~100 species of insects demonstrating such behavior. Yet, this list lacks detailed descriptions, and a more comprehensive summary of its prevalence in invertebrates, as well as ethology, causes, implications, and evolution of this behavior, remains lacking".
Dragonflies
Male homosexuality has been inferred in several species of dragonflies (the order Odonata). The cloacal pinchers of male damselflies and dragonflies inflict characteristic head damage to females during sex. A survey of 11 species of damsel and dragonflies has revealed such mating damages in 20 to 80% of the males too, indicating a fairly high occurrence of sexual coupling between males.
Fruit flies
Male Drosophila melanogaster flies bearing two copies of a mutant allele in the fruitless gene court and attempt to mate exclusively with other males. The genetic basis of animal homosexuality has been studied in the fly D. melanogaster. Here, multiple genes have been identified that can cause homosexual courtship and mating. These genes are thought to control behavior through pheromones as well as altering the structure of the animal's brains. These studies have also investigated the influence of environment on the likelihood of flies displaying homosexual behavior.
Bed bugs
Male bed bugs (Cimex lectularius) are sexually attracted to any newly fed individual and this results in homosexual mounting. This occurs in heterosexual mounting by the traumatic insemination in which the male pierces the female abdomen with his needle-like penis. In homosexual mating this risks abdominal injuries as males lack the female counteradaptive spermalege structure. Males produce alarm pheromones to reduce such homosexual mating.


This is a list of the mammal species recorded in Samoa. There are nine mammal species in Samoa, of which one is endangered and two are vulnerable.
Order: Chiroptera (bats)
The bats' most distinguishing feature is that their forelimbs are developed as wings, making them the only mammals capable of flight. Bat species account for about 20% of all mammals.

Family: Pteropodidae (flying foxes, Old World fruit bats)
Subfamily: Pteropodinae
Genus: Pteropus
Samoa flying-fox, Pteropus samoensis VU
Insular flying-fox, Pteropus tonganus LR/lc
Family: Vespertilionidae
Subfamily: Myotinae
Genus: Myotis
Insular myotis, Myotis insularum DD
Family: Emballonuridae
Genus: Emballonura
Polynesian sheath-tailed bat, Emballonura semicaudata EN
Order: Cetacea (whales)
The order Cetacea includes whales, dolphins and porpoises. They are the mammals most fully adapted to aquatic life with a spindle-shaped nearly hairless body, protected by a thick layer of blubber, and forelimbs and tail modified to provide propulsion underwater.

Suborder: Mysticeti
Family: Balaenopteridae
Subfamily: Megapterinae
Genus: Megaptera
Humpback whale, Megaptera novaeangliae LC
Suborder: Odontoceti
Superfamily: Platanistoidea
Family: Ziphidae
Subfamily: Hyperoodontinae
Genus: Mesoplodon
Ginkgo-toothed beaked whale, Mesoplodon ginkgodens DD
Family: Delphinidae (marine dolphins)
Genus: Tursiops
Bottlenose dolphin, Tursiops truncatus DD
Genus: Stenella
Spinner dolphin, Stenella longirostris LR/cd
Genus: Lagenodelphis
Fraser's dolphin, Lagenodelphis hosei DD


This is a list of the mammal species recorded in Myanmar.
Order: Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates & cetaceans)Order: Carnivora (carnivorans)Order: Chiroptera (bats)Order: Dermoptera (colugos)Order: Eulipotyphla (Hedgehogs, shrews, moles and relatives)Order: Lagomorpha (lagomorphs)Order: Rodentia (rodents)Order: Perissodactyla (odd-toed ungulates)Order: Pholidota (pangolins)Order: PrimatesOrder: Proboscidea (elephants)Order: Scandentia (treeshrews)Order: Sirenia (manatees and dugongs)


National animals are important symbols that represent a country's cultural identity, heritage, and natural environment. National animals are typically chosen for qualities, such as strength, courage, or resilience, and they reflect the values or historical, mythological and cultural significance of a nation. Recognition of a national animal is typically formalized through legislation or an official document by which the community or collectivity operates.
The use of national animals goes back to ancient totemism. According to Émile Durkheim, totemism involves the veneration of a totemic animal as sacred, which also serves to organize social structures within the clan. Members of the clan are believed to embody the attributes of their totemic animal. Animals are typically chosen over plants or rocks because of the natural relationship between humans and animals, especially in economic life. Some of these dynamics persist in the concept of national animals.
National animals can be determined through both bottom-up and top-down approaches, that is, can be created, imported, or inherited. The characteristics of the national animal are altered to portray the self-perception of the nation. They symbolize and uphold the ideal shared values of the country's population. The country's other national symbols, such as the coat of arms and currency, usually bear the national animal.
National animals


Bats (order Chiroptera ) are winged mammals, the only mammals capable of true and sustained flight. Bats are more agile in flight than most birds, using long, spread-out digits covered with a thin membrane or patagium. The smallest bat, and one of the smallest extant mammals, is Kitti's hog-nosed bat, which is 29–33 mm (1.1–1.3 in) in length, 150 mm (5.9 in) across the forearm and 2 g (0.071 oz) in mass. The largest bats are the flying foxes, with the giant golden-crowned flying fox (Acerodon jubatus) reaching a weight of 1.5 kg (3.3 lb) and having a wingspan of 1.6 m (5 ft 3 in).
The second-largest order of mammals after rodents, bats account for about 20% of all classified mammal species worldwide, with at least 1,500 known species. These were traditionally divided into two suborders: the largely fruit-eating megabats and the microbats. But more recent evidence has supported dividing the order into Yinpterochiroptera and Yangochiroptera, with megabats as members of the former along with several species of microbats. Many bats are insectivores, and most of the rest are frugivores (fruit-eaters) or nectarivores (nectar-eaters). A few species feed on animals other than insects; for example, the vampire bats are haematophagous (feed on blood). Most bats are nocturnal, and many roost in caves or other refuges; it is uncertain whether bats have these behaviours to escape predators. Bats are distributed globally in almost all regions. They are important in their ecosystems for pollinating flowers and dispersing seeds as well as controlling insect populations.
Bats provide humans with some direct benefits, at the cost of some disadvantages. Bat dung has been mined as guano from caves and used as fertiliser. Bats consume insect pests, reducing the need for pesticides and other insect management measures. Bats are sometimes numerous enough and close enough to human settlements to serve as tourist attractions, and they are used as food in Africa, Asia, the Pacific and the Caribbean. Due to their physiology, bats are one type of animal that acts as a natural reservoir of many pathogens, such as rabies, and since they are highly mobile, social, and long-lived, they can readily spread disease among themselves. If humans interact with bats, these traits become potentially dangerous to humans.
Depending on the culture, bats may be symbolically associated with positive traits, such as protection from certain diseases or risks, rebirth, or long life, but in the West, bats are popularly associated with darkness, malevolence, witchcraft, and vampires.
Etymology
A dialectal English name for bats is "flittermouse", which matches their name in other Germanic languages (for example, German Fledermaus and Swedish fladdermus), related to the fluttering of wings. Middle English had bakke, most likely cognate with Old Swedish natbakka ('night-bat'), which may have undergone a shift from -k- to -t- (to Modern English bat) influenced by Latin blatta, 'moth, nocturnal insect'. The word bat was probably first used in the early 1570s.
The order name Chiroptera derives from the Ancient Greek χείρ (kheír), meaning "hand", and πτερόν (pterón), meaning "wing".
Phylogeny and taxonomyEvolution
The delicate skeletons of bats do not fossilise well; it is estimated that only 12% of bat genera that lived have been found in the fossil record. The oldest known bat fossils include Archaeonycteris praecursor and Altaynycteris aurora (55–56 million years ago), both known only from isolated teeth. The oldest complete bat skeletons are Icaronycteris gunnelli and Onychonycteris finneyi (52 million years ago), known from two skeletons discovered in Wyoming. The extinct bats Palaeochiropteryx and Hassianycteris from the Messel Pit of Germany, both of which lived 48 million years ago, are the first fossil mammals whose colouration has been discovered: both were reddish-brown. The largest known fossil bat known from a near-complete skeleton is Archaeopteropus (~33 million years ago) from Italy, which had a wingspan of about 82 to 90 centimetres (2.69 to 2.95 ft).
Bats were formerly grouped in the superorder Archonta, along with the treeshrews (Scandentia), colugos (Dermoptera), and primates. Modern genetic evidence now places bats in the superorder Laurasiatheria, with its sister taxon as Ferungulata, which includes carnivorans, pangolins, odd-toed ungulates, and even-toed ungulates. One study places Chiroptera as a sister taxon to odd-toed ungulates (Perissodactyla).

The flying primate hypothesis proposed that when adaptations to flight are removed, megabats are allied to primates and colugos by anatomical features not shared with microbats, and thus flight evolved twice in mammals. Genetic studies have strongly supported the common ancestry of all bats and the single origin of mammal flight.
Co-evolutionary evidence
An independent molecular analysis trying to establish the dates when bat ectoparasites (bedbugs) evolved came to the conclusion that bedbugs similar to those known today (all major extant lineages, all of which feed primarily on bats) had already diversified and become established over 100 million years ago, suggesting that they initially all evolved on non-bat hosts and "bats were colonized several times independently, unless the evolutionary origin of bats has been grossly underestimated". No analysis has provided estimates for the age of the flea lineages associated with bats. The oldest known members of a different lineage of bat ectoparasites (bat flies), however, are from roughly 20 million years ago, well after the origin of bats. The bat-ectoparasitic earwig family Arixeniidae has no fossil record but is not believed to originate more than 23 million years ago.
Inner systematics
A 2011 study supported separating megabats and microbats. However, other and more recent evidence indicates that megabats belong within the microbats. Two new suborders have been proposed; Yinpterochiroptera includes the Pteropodidae, or megabat family, as well as the families Rhinolophidae, Hipposideridae, Craseonycteridae, Megadermatidae, and Rhinopomatidae. Yangochiroptera includes the other families of bats (all of which use laryngeal echolocation), a conclusion supported by a 2005 DNA study. A 2013 phylogenomic study supported the two new proposed suborders.

The 2003 discovery of an early fossil bat from the 52-million-year-old Green River Formation, Onychonycteris finneyi, indicates that flight evolved before echolocative abilities. Unlike modern bats, Onychonycteris had claws on all five of its fingers. It also had longer hind legs and shorter forearms, possible adaptations for climbing. This palm-sized bat had short, broad wings, suggesting that it could not fly as fast or as far as later bat species. Instead of flapping its wings continuously while flying, Onychonycteris probably switched between flaps and glides in the air. Hence flight in bats likely developed from gliding and in arboreal locomotors, rather than terrestrial runners. This model of flight development, commonly known as the "trees-down" theory, holds that bats first flew by taking advantage of height and gravity to drop down on to prey, rather than running fast enough for a ground-level take-off.

The molecular phylogeny was controversial, as it pointed to microbats not having a unique common ancestry, which implied that some seemingly unlikely transformations occurred. The first is that laryngeal echolocation evolved twice in bats, once in Yangochiroptera and once in the rhinolophoids. The second is that laryngeal echolocation had a single origin in Chiroptera, was lost in the family Pteropodidae (all megabats), and later evolved as a system of tongue-clicking in the genus Rousettus. Analyses of the sequence of the vocalisation gene FoxP2 were inconclusive on whether laryngeal echolocation was lost in the pteropodids or gained in the echolocating lineages. Echolocation probably first derived in bats from communicative calls. The Eocene bats Icaronycteris (52 million years ago) and Palaeochiropteryx had cranial adaptations suggesting an ability to produce ultrasound. This may have been used at first mainly to forage on the ground for insects and map out their surroundings in their gliding phase or for communicative purposes. After the adaptation of flight was established, it may have been refined to target flying prey. A 2008 analysis of the hearing gene Prestin seems to favour the idea that echolocation developed independently at least twice, rather than being lost secondarily in the pteropodids, but ontogenic analysis of the cochlea supports that laryngeal echolocation evolved only once.
Classification
Bats are placental mammals. After rodents, they are the largest order, making up about 20% of known mammal species. In 1758, Carl Linnaeus classified the seven bat species he knew of in the genus Vespertilio in the order Primates. Around twenty years later, the German naturalist Johann Friedrich Blumenbach gave them their own order, Chiroptera. Since then, the number of described species has risen to over 1,500, traditionally classified as two suborders: Megachiroptera (megabats) and Microchiroptera (microbats/echolocating bats). Not all megabats are larger than microbats. Several characteristics distinguish the two groups. Microbats use echolocation for navigation and finding prey, but megabats, apart from those in the genus Rousettus, do not. Accordingly, megabats have well-developed eyesight. Megabats have a claw on the second finger of the forelimb, external ears close to form a ring, and lack a tail. They only feed on plant material like fruit and nectar.

Below is a table chart following the bat classification of families recognised by various authors of the ninth volume of Handbook of the Mammals of the World published in 2019:
Anatomy and physiologySkull and dentition
The head and teeth shape of bats can vary by species. In general, megabats have a fox-like appearance with long snouts and ears, hence their nickname of "flying foxes". Among microbats, longer snouts are associated with nectar-feeding, while vampire bats have reduced snouts. The number of teeth in bats can vary between 38 teeth in small, insect-eating species and as low as 20 in vampire bats. A diet of hard-shelled insects requires fewer but larger teeth along with longer canines and more robust lower jaws. In nectar-feeding bats, the canines are long, while the cheek teeth are reduced. In fruit-eating microbats, the cusps of the cheek teeth are adapted for crushing. The upper incisors of vampire bats lack enamel, which keeps them razor-sharp. The bite force of small bats is generated through mechanical advantage, allowing them to bite through the hardened armour of insects or the skin of fruit.
Wings, skin, and flight
Bats are the only mammals capable of sustained flight, as opposed to the gliding of flying squirrels, colugos and sugar gliders. The fastest bat, the Mexican free-tailed bat (Tadarida brasiliensis), can achieve a ground speed of 160 km/h (100 mph).

The flexible finger bones of bats have a flattened cross-section and become less mineralised towards the tips. The elongation of bat digits, a key feature required for wing development, is due to the upregulation of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs). During embryonic development, the gene controlling BMP signalling, BMP-2, is subjected to increased expression in bat forelimbs – resulting in the extension of the manual digits. This crucial genetic alteration helps create the specialised limbs required for powered flight. The relative proportion of extant bat forelimb digits compared with those of Eocene fossil bats have no significant differences, suggesting that bat wing morphology has been conserved for over fifty million years. During flight, the bones undergo bending and shearing stress; the former being less than in terrestrial mammals, and the latter being greater. The wing bones of bats are less resistant to breaking than those of birds.
As in other mammals, and unlike in birds, the radius is the main component of the forearm. Bats have five elongated digits, which all radiate around the wrist. The thumb points forward and supports the leading edge of the wing, and the other digits support the tension held in the wing membrane. The second and third digits go along the wingtip, allowing the wing to be pulled forward against aerodynamic drag without having to be thick, as in pterosaur wings. The fourth and fifth digits go from the wrist to the trailing edge and repel the bending force caused by air pushing up against the stiff membrane. The knees point upwards and outwards during flight due to the attachment of the femurs, while the ankle joint can bend the trailing edge downwards.

Due to their flexible joints, bats are more manoeuvrable and more dexterous than gliding mammals, and their thin, articulated wings allow them to manoeuvre more accurately than birds and fly with more lift and less drag. By folding the wings in toward their bodies on the upstroke, they save 35 percent energy during flight. Flight muscles used for the upstroke are located on the back, while those for the downstroke are at the chest. This is in contrast to birds, where both muscle types are at the chest. Nectar- and pollen-eating bats can hover in a similar way to hummingbirds. The sharp leading edges of the wings can create vortices, which provide lift. The vortex may be stabilised by the animal changing its wing curvature.

The patagium is the wing membrane, which reaches from the arm and finger bones to the side of the body and the hindlimbs. The extent to which the tail of a bat is attached to a patagium can vary by species, with some having completely free tails or even no tails. For bat embryos, only the hindfeet experience apoptosis (programmed cell death), while the forefeet retain webbing between the fingers that become the wing membranes. These structures include connective tissue, elastic fibres, nerves, muscles, and blood vessels. The muscles keep the membrane taut as the animal flies.
While the skin on the body of the bat is covered in hair and sweat glands with an epidermis, a dermis, and a fatty subcutaneous layer, the patagium is an extremely thin double layer of epidermis separated by a connective tissue centre rich with collagen and elastic fibres. The surface of the wings is equipped with touch-sensitive receptors on small bumps called Merkel cells. Each bump has a tiny hair in the centre, allowing the bat to detect and adapt to changing airflow; the primary use is to judge the most efficient speed at which to fly, and possibly also to avoid stalls. Insectivorous bats may also use tactile hairs when manoeuvring to capture flying insects. While delicate, the membranes can heal quickly and regrow when torn.
Photoluminescence has been reported in at least six North American species based on 60 museum specimens. The wings, uropatagium (around the tail), and hind limbs of these bats glowed green when exposed to UV light. The explanation for this is uncertain, and some have suggested the phenomenon is an artefact of the techniques used to dry specimens for museum storage.
Roosting and gaits
When not flying, bats hang upside down from their feet, a posture known as roosting. Most megabats roost with the head tucked towards the belly, whereas most microbats roost with the neck curled towards the back. This difference is due to the structure of the cervical or neck vertebrae in the two groups, which are clearly distinct. Tendons allow bats to hang from a roost with no effort, which is needed to release.
Bats are more awkward when crawling on the ground, though a few species, such as the New Zealand lesser short-tailed bat (Mystacina tuberculata) and the common vampire bat (Desmodus rotundus), are quite agile. These species move their limbs one after the other, but vampire bats accelerate by bounding, the folded-up wings being used to propel them forward. Vampire bats likely evolved these gaits to stalk their hosts, while short-tailed bats took to the ground due to a lack of competition from other mammals. Terrestrial locomotion does not appear to affect their ability to fly.
Internal systems
Bats have an efficient circulatory system. They seem to make use of particularly strong venomotion, a rhythmic contraction of venous wall muscles. In most mammals, the walls of the veins provide mainly passive resistance, maintaining their shape as deoxygenated blood flows through them, but in bats, they appear to actively support blood flow back to the heart with this pumping action. Because of their small, lightweight bodies, bats are not at risk of blood rushing to their heads when roosting. Compared to a terrestrial mammal of similar size, the bat's heart can be up to three times larger and pump more blood, while blood oxygen levels are twice as much. An active microbat can reach a heart rate of 1000 beats per minute.

Bats possess a highly adapted respiratory system to cope with the demands of powered flight. They have relatively large lungs, and many species have proportionally larger alveolar surface areas and pulmonary capillary blood volumes than other mammals. During flight, the respiratory cycle has a one-to-one relationship with the wing-beat cycle. Their mammalian lungs prevent them from flying at high altitudes. Bats can also meet oxygen demands by exchanging gas through the patagium of the wing. When the bat has its wings spread, it allows for an increase in surface area to volume ratio, 85% of the surface area being the wing. The subcutaneous vessels in the membrane lie near the surface and allow for the diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide.
The digestive system of bats varies depending on the species of bat and its diet. Digestion is relatively quick to meet the energy demands of flight. Insectivorous bats may have certain digestive enzymes to better process insects, such as chitinase to break down their chitin exoskeleton. Vampire bats, probably due to their diet of blood, are unique among vertebrates in that they do not have the enzyme maltase, which breaks down malt sugar, in their intestinal tract. Nectivorous and frugivorous bats have more maltase and sucrase enzymes than insectivores, to cope with the higher sugar contents of their diet.
The adaptations of the kidneys of bats vary with their diets. Carnivorous and vampire bats consume large amounts of protein and can output concentrated urine; their kidneys have a thin cortex and long renal papillae. Frugivorous bats lack that ability and have kidneys adapted for electrolyte retention due to their low-electrolyte diet; their kidneys accordingly have a thick cortex and very short conical papillae. Flying gives bats relatively high metabolism, which increases respiratory water loss. Lipids known as cerebrosides retain water in cold temperatures but allow for evaporation through the skin in hot temperatures to cool them. Water helps maintain the ionic balance in their blood, thermoregulation system and urinary and waste system. They are also susceptible to blood urea poisoning if they do not receive enough fluid.
The structure of the uterine system in female bats can vary by species, with some having two uterine horns while others have a single mainline chamber.
SensesEcholocation and hearing
Microbats and a few megabats emit ultrasonic sounds to produce echoes. The sound intensity of these echoes is dependent on subglottic pressure. The bats' cricothyroid muscle, located inside the larynx, controls the orientation pulse frequency, which is an important function. By comparing the outgoing pulse with the returning echoes, bats can learn about their environment and detect prey in darkness. Some bat calls can reach over 140 decibels. Microbats use their larynx to emit echolocation signals through the mouth or the nose. Bat call frequencies range from as low as 11 kHz to as high as 212 kHz. The noses of various groups of bats have fleshy extensions, known as nose-leaves, which play a role in sound transmission.
In low-duty cycle echolocation, bats can separate their calls and returning echoes by time. They have to time their short calls to finish before echoes return. In high-duty cycle echolocation, bats emit a continuous call and separate pulse and echo in frequency using the Doppler effect of their motion in flight. The shift of the returning echoes yields information relating to the motion and location of the bat's prey. These bats must deal with changes in the Doppler shift due to changes in their flight speed. They have adapted to change their pulse emission frequency in relation to their flight speed so echoes still return in the optimal hearing range.
In addition to echolocating prey, bat ears are sensitive to sounds made by their prey, such as the fluttering of moth wings. The complex geometry of ridges on the inner surface of bat ears helps to sharply focus echolocation signals and to passively listen for any other sound produced by the prey. These ridges can be regarded as the acoustic equivalent of a Fresnel lens. Bats can estimate the elevation of their target using the interference patterns from the echoes reflecting from the tragus, a flap of skin in the external ear.

By repeated scanning, bats can mentally construct an accurate image of the environment in which they are moving and of their prey. Many species of moth have exploited this, such as many tiger moths, which produce aposematic ultrasound signals to warn bats that they are chemically protected and therefore distasteful. Some tiger moths can produce signals to jam bat echolocation. In some moth species, the tympanum hearing organ causes the insect to move in random evasive manoeuvres when detecting a bat call.
Vision
Microbats tend to have small eyes but are still sensitive to light, and no species is truly blind. Most microbats have mesopic vision, meaning that they can detect light only in low levels, whereas other mammals have photopic vision, which allows colour vision. Microbats may use their vision for orientation and while travelling between their roosting grounds and feeding grounds, as echolocation is effective only over short distances. Megabat species generally have good eyesight and may have some colour vision to help them distinguish ripe fruits. Some species can detect ultraviolet (UV). As the bodies of some microbats have distinct colouration, they may be able to discriminate colours.
Smell
Among bat species, megabats tend to have a more developed sense of smell, being particularly sensitive to esters, which are found in ripe fruits. Similarly, smell is also important for vampire bats, which sense a potential host by their fur or faeces. Insectivorous bats have less use for smell during foraging, as they rely on echolocation to search for prey.
Magnetoreception and infrared sensing
Like birds, microbats' sensitivity to the Earth's magnetic field gives them great magnetoreception. Microbats use a polarity-based compass, which means they can distinguish north from south, unlike birds, which use the strength of the magnetic field to differentiate latitudes, which may be used in long-distance travel. The mechanism possibly involves magnetite particles. Vampire bats are the only mammals that use infrared sensing; heat sensors around the nose allow them to detect blood vessels near the surface of the skin of their target.
Thermoregulation
Tropical bats tend to be homoeothermic (having a stable body temperature), while temperate and subtropical species which enter hibernation or torpor are more heterothermic (where body temperature can vary). Compared to other mammals, bats have a high thermal conductivity. They lose heat via the wings when they are spread, so resting bats wrap their wings around themselves to keep warm. Smaller bats generally have a higher metabolic rate than larger bats and so need to consume more food in order to maintain homoeothermy.
Bats may avoid flying during the day to prevent overheating in the sun, since they would absorb sun radiation via their dark wing membranes. Bats may not be able to release heat if the ambient temperature is too high; they use saliva to cool themselves in extreme conditions. Among megabats, the flying fox Pteropus hypomelanus uses saliva and wing-fanning to cool itself while roosting during the hottest part of the day. Among microbats, the Yuma myotis (Myotis yumanensis), the Mexican free-tailed bat (Tadarida brasiliensis), and the pallid bat (Antrozous pallidus) cope with temperatures up to 45 °C (113 °F) by panting, salivating, and licking their fur to promote evaporative cooling; this is sufficient to release twice their metabolic heat production.

During torpor, bats drop their body temperature to 6–30 °C (43–86 °F), while their energy usage diminishes by 50 to 99%. Tropical bats may use it to reduce the chance of being caught by a predator during foraging. Megabats were generally believed to be homoeothermic, but three species of small megabats, with a mass of about 50 grams (1+3⁄4 ounces), have been known to use torpor: the common blossom bat (Syconycteris australis), the long-tongued nectar bat (Macroglossus minimus), and the eastern tube-nosed bat (Nyctimene robinsoni). Torpid states last longer in the summer for megabats than in the winter.
During hibernation, bats enter a torpid state and decrease their body temperature for 99.6% of their hibernation period; even during periods of arousal, when their body temperature returns to normal, they sometimes enter a shallow torpid state, known as "heterothermic arousal". Some bats become dormant during higher temperatures to keep cool in the summer months (aestivation).
Heterothermic bats during long migrations may fly at night and go into a torpid state roosting in the daytime. Unlike migratory birds, which fly during the day and feed during the night, nocturnal bats have a conflict between travelling and eating. The energy saved reduces their food requirements and also decreases the duration of migration, which may prevent them from spending too much time in unfamiliar places and decrease predation. In some species, pregnant individuals use a more moderate state of torpor to maintain foetal development, while still saving energy.
Size
The smallest bat, and one of the smallest mammals, is Kitti's hog-nosed bat (Craseonycteris thonglongyai), which is 29–33 mm (1+1⁄8–1+1⁄4 in) long with a 150-millimetre (6 in) forearm and weighs 2 oz (56+11⁄16 g). The largest species is the giant golden-crowned flying fox (Acerodon jubatus), which can weigh 1.5 kg (3+1⁄4 lb) with a wingspan of 1.6 m (5 ft 3 in). Larger bats tend to use lower frequencies and smaller bats higher for echolocation; high-frequency echolocation is better at detecting smaller prey. Small prey may be absent in the diets of large bats as they are unable to detect them.
Ecology
Flight has enabled bats to become one of the most widespread groups of mammals, being found nearly everywhere apart from polar regions, some remote islands and the very tops of mountains. Species diversity is greater in tropical areas than temperate ones. Bats are about 66% of all mammalian individuals, despite being just 10% of the total biomass of wild terrestrial mammals. Different species select different habitats during different seasons, including ocean coasts, mountains, rainforests and deserts, but they require suitable roosts. Bat roosts can be found in hollows, crevices, foliage, and even human-made structures and include "tents" the bats construct with leaves; megabats generally roost in trees. Bats are usually nocturnal but are known to exhibit diurnal behaviour in temperate regions during summer to make up for insufficient nighttime feeding and where there is little predatory threat from birds.
In temperate areas, some bats migrate to winter hibernation dens, usually caves and mines, where they pass into torpor during the cold weather, never waking and relying on their stored fat. Similarly, tropical bats go through aestivation during periods of prolonged heat and dryness. Bats rarely fly in rain, possibly because being wet costs them more energy and raindrops interfere with their echolocation. They do appear to surf storm fronts when travelling to give birth in warmer temperatures.
Food and feeding
Different bat species have different diets, including insects, nectar, pollen, fruit and even vertebrates. Megabats are mostly fruit, nectar and pollen eaters. Due to their small size, high metabolism and rapid burning of energy through flight, bats must consume large amounts of food for their size. Insectivorous bats may eat over 120 percent of their body weight per day, while frugivorous bats may eat over twice their weight. They can travel significant distances each night, exceptionally as much as 38.5 km (24 mi) in the spotted bat (Euderma maculatum), in search of food. Bats may acquire water from the food they eat or drink from sources like lakes and streams, flying over the surface and dipping their tongues into the water.
Bats as a group appear to be losing vitamin C synthesis. Such a loss was recorded in 34 bat species from six major families, both insect- and fruit-eating, with the cause being a single mutation inherited from a common ancestor. Vitamin C synthesis has been recorded in at least two species of bat, Leschenault's rousette (Rousettus leschenaultii) and the great roundleaf bat (Hipposideros armiger).
Insects and invertebrates
Most bats, especially in temperate areas, prey on insects. The diet of an insectivorous bat may span many species, including flies, mosquitos, beetles, moths, grasshoppers, crickets, termites, bees, wasps, mayflies and caddisflies. They will also eat other arthropods such as spiders, scorpions, centipedes, lobsters and shrimp. Large numbers of Mexican free-tailed bats (Tadarida brasiliensis) fly hundreds of metres above the ground in central Texas to feed on migrating moths. Species that hunt insects in flight, like the little brown bat (Myotis lucifugus) and the eastern red bat (Lasiurus borealis), may catch an insect in mid-air directly with the mouth or use their tail membranes or wings. The slow-moving brown long-eared bat (Plecotus auritus) plucks insects from vegetation, while many horseshoe bat species wait for them from their perches. Some bats may take the insect to their roost and eat it there. Arthropod-eating bats living at high latitudes have to consume prey with higher energetic value than tropical bats.
Plant material
Consumption of fruit, nectar, pollen and other plant material occurs in megabats and New World leaf-nosed bats. Bats prefer ripe fruit and typically pull it from a tree and travel somewhere else to feed, possibly to avoid predators, though larger megabats may eat on site at the fruiting tree. The Jamaican fruit bat (Artibeus jamaicensis) has been recorded carrying fruit weighing as much as 50 g (1.8 oz). Many species of plants depend on bats for seed dispersal. Fruit-eating bats sometimes chew leaves to suck up the moisture and then spit them out. Bats apparently cannot digest cellulose.
Nectar-eating bats have acquired specialised adaptations. These bats possess long muzzles and long, extensible tongues covered in fine bristles that aid them in feeding on particular flowers and plants. The tube-lipped nectar bat (Anoura fistulata) has a proportionally longer tongue than any mammal and is the only species capable of reaching deep into the flowers of Centropogon nigri. When the tongue retracts, it is pulled inside the rib cage. Because of these features, nectar-feeding bats cannot easily turn to other food sources in times of scarcity, making them more at risk of extinction than other species. Nectar feeding also aids a variety of plants, since these bats serve as pollinators, as pollen attaches to their fur while they feed. Around 500 species of flowering plant rely on bat pollination and thus tend to open their flowers at night. Many rainforest and Mediterranean plants depend on bat pollination.
Vertebrates
Some bats prey on other vertebrates, such as fish, frogs, lizards, birds and mammals. The fringe-lipped bat (Trachops cirrhosus), for example, is skilled at catching frogs, locating them by tracking their mating calls. The greater noctule bat (Nyctalus lasiopterus) hunts and catches birds in flight. Some species, like the greater bulldog bat (Noctilio leporinus), hunt fish, flying over the water and grabbing them with their clawed feet. They use echolocation and may be alerted by ripples on the surface or a jumping fish. Some species feed on other bats, including the spectral bat (Vampyrum spectrum) and the ghost bat (Macroderma gigas).
Blood
The three species of vampire bat strictly feed on animal blood (hematophagy); the common vampire bat feeds on mammals, while the hairy-legged (Diphylla ecaudata) and white-winged vampire bats (Diaemus youngi) feed on birds. Vampire bats target sleeping prey and can sense deep breathing. They cut through and peel the animal's skin with their teeth and lap up the blood with their tongues, which have grooves on the underside adapted to this purpose. Certain substances in the saliva keep the blood flowing.
Predators, parasites, and diseases
Bats are subject to predation from birds of prey, such as owls, hawks, and falcons. J. Rydell and J. R. Speakman argue that bats evolved nocturnality during the early Eocene period to avoid predators. Other zoologists find the evidence to be unclear and contradictory. Twenty-two (maybe twenty-three or twenty-four) species of tropical New World snakes are known to eat bats; they may wait for them at the entrances of their refuges or attack them inside. As are most mammals, bats are hosts to a number of internal and external parasites. Among ectoparasites, bats carry fleas and mites, as well as specific parasites such as bat bugs and bat flies (Nycteribiidae and Streblidae). Bats generally do not host lice, possibly due to high competition from other parasites, including the more specialised ones. Internal parasites of bats include tapeworms, roundworms and flukes.

White nose syndrome is a condition associated with the deaths of millions of bats in North America. The disease is named after a white fungus, Pseudogymnoascus destructans, found growing on the muzzles, ears, and wings of affected bats. The fungus is mostly spread from bat to bat and causes weight loss, dehydration and electrolyte imbalances. The fungus was first discovered in central New York State in 2006 and spread to 30 US states and five Canadian provinces; mortality rates as high as 99% have occurred for affected bat wintering caves. To treat the disease, scientists have used probiotic dermal bacteria and antifungal vaccines, which can improve survival by as much as 50%.
Bats are natural reservoirs for a large number of zoonotic pathogens, including rabies, endemic in many bat populations; histoplasmosis, both directly and in guano; Nipah and Hendra viruses; and possibly the Ebola virus. Their high mobility, broad distribution, long life spans, substantial sympatry (range overlap) of species, and social behaviour make bats favourable hosts and vectors of disease. Reviews have found different answers as to whether bats have more zoonotic viruses (transferable to humans) than other mammal groups. One 2015 review found that among mammals, bats, rodents, and primates harboured the most zoonotic viruses by a significant margin, though bats had about as many zoonotic viruses as rodents and primates. Another 2020 review of mammals and birds found that the taxon of the reservoir was not a factor in whether a virus was zoonotic. Instead, more diverse groups had greater viral diversity.
Bats seem to be highly resistant to many of the pathogens they carry, suggesting a degree of adaptation to their immune systems. Their interactions with livestock and pets, including predation by vampire bats, compound the risk of zoonotic transmission. Bats have been connected to the emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in China, since they serve as natural hosts for coronaviruses, several from a cave in Yunnan, one of which developed into the SARS virus. However, there is no evidence that bats cause or spread COVID-19.
Behaviour and life historySocial structure
Bats may roost solitarily or in colonies; Mexican free-tailed bats roost in the millions, while the hoary bat (Lasiurus cinereus) is mostly solitary, aside from mothers with young. Living in large colonies lessens the risk to an individual of predation. Temperate bat species may swarm at hibernation sites as autumn approaches. This may serve to guide young to these sites, signal reproduction in adults and allow adults to breed with those from other groups.
Several species have a fission-fusion social structure, where large numbers of bats congregate in one roosting area, along with the breaking up and mixing of subgroups. Within these societies, long-term relationships form despite the fluidity of grouping. Some of these relationships consist of matrilineally related females and their dependent offspring. Food sharing and mutual grooming are known to occur in species like the common vampire bat (Desmodus rotundus).
Communication
Bats produce calls to attract mates, find roost partners and defend resources. These calls are typically low-frequency and wide-travelling. Species like Daubenton's bat (Myotis daubentonii) are capable of lowering their vocal range in a manner similar to a death growl, which they use in conflict with other individuals. Mexican free-tailed bats are one of the few species to "sing" like birds. Males sing to attract females, and their songs consist of chirps, trills and buzzes, the first of which has distinct "A" and "B" syllables. Bat songs are highly stereotypical but differ in syllable number, phrase order, and phrase repetitions between individuals. Among greater spear-nosed bats (Phyllostomus hastatus), females produce loud, broadband calls among their roost mates to form group cohesion. Roosting groups have their own distinct calls, and these may arise from vocal learning.
In a study on captive Egyptian fruit bats, 70% of the directed calls could be identified by the researchers as to which individual bat made it, and 60% could occur in four contexts: fights over food, quarrelling for a sleeping position, female aggression toward amorous males, and arguing between perched neighbours. The animals made slightly different sounds when communicating with different individual bats, especially those of the opposite sex. In the highly sexually dimorphic hammer-headed bat (Hypsignathus monstrosus), males display to females with a "deep, resonating, monotonous call". Bats in flight make vocal signals for traffic control. Greater bulldog bats honk when on a collision course with each other.
Bats also communicate by other means. Male little yellow-shouldered bats (Sturnira lilium) use a spicy odour secreted from their shoulder glands during the breeding season, retained and spread by specialised hairs. These hairs exist in other species, which are noticeable as collars around the necks in some Old World megabat males. Male greater sac-winged bats (Saccopteryx bilineata) have sacs in their wings in which they mix body secretions like saliva and urine to create a perfume that they sprinkle on roost sites, a behaviour known as "salting". The bats may sing while salting.
Reproduction and life cycle
Most bat species are polygynous, where males mate with multiple females. Male pipistrelle, noctule, and vampire bats may claim and defend resources that attract females, such as roost sites, and mate with those females. Males unable to claim a site are forced to live on the periphery, where they have less reproductive success. Promiscuity, where both sexes mate with multiple partners, exists in species like the Mexican free-tailed bat and the little brown bat. There appears to be bias towards certain males among females in these bats. In a few species, such as the yellow-winged bat (Lavia frons) and spectral bat, adult males and females form monogamous pairs. Lek mating, where males aggregate and compete for female choice through display, is rare in bats but occurs in the hammerheaded bat.
Temperate-living bats typically mate during late summer and autumn, while tropical bats may mate multiple times a year. In hibernating species, males will copulate with females in torpor. Female bats use a variety of strategies to control the timing of pregnancy and birth, to make delivery coincide with maximum food availability and other ecological factors. Females of some species use delayed fertilisation, in which mating occurs in late summer to early autumn, but sperm is stored in the reproductive tract, delaying fertilisation until the following late winter to early spring. Other species exhibit delayed implantation, in which the egg is fertilised after mating but does not experience all its cell divisions until external conditions become favourable. In another strategy, fertilisation and implantation both occur, but development of the foetus is delayed until good conditions prevail. During the delayed development, the mother keeps the fertilised egg alive with nutrients. An advanced gas exchange system allows this process to be sustained for a long period.

Gestation in bats ranges from around 40 days to eight months, correlating with the size of the species. In most bat species, females carry and give birth to a single pup per litter. A newborn bat pup can be up to 40 percent of the mother's weight, and the pelvic girdle of the female can expand during birth as the two halves are connected by a flexible ligament. Females typically give birth upright or horizontally, using gravity to make the process easier. The young emerges rear-first, possibly to prevent the wings from becoming tangled, and the female holds it in her wing and tail membranes. In many species, females give birth and raise their young in maternity colonies and may assist each other in birthing.
Most of the care for a young bat comes from the mother, though in monogamous species, the father plays a role. Allo-suckling, where a female suckles another mother's young, occurs in several species. This may serve to increase colony size in species where females breed in their birth colonies. Young bats can fly after they develop their adult body dimensions and forelimb length. For the little brown bat, this occurs when they are eighteen days old. Weaning of young for most species takes place in under 80 days. The common vampire bat nurses its offspring beyond that, and young vampire bats achieve independence later in life than other species. This is probably due to the species's blood-based diet, as the female may not be able to feed on a nightly basis.
Life expectancy
The maximum lifespan of bats is three-and-a-half times that of other mammals of similar size; a Siberian bat (Myotis sibiricus) was recaptured in the wild after 41 years, making it the oldest known bat. One hypothesis consistent with the rate-of-living theory links this to the fact that they slow their metabolic rate while hibernating: bats that hibernate, on average, have a longer lifespan than bats that do not. Another hypothesis states that lower mortality is linked to flying, which would also be true for birds and gliding mammals. In addition, female bats that give birth to multiple pups annually generally have reduced lifespans compared to those that have one pup. Also, cave-roosting species may have a longer lifespan than non-roosting species due to less predation in caves.
Conservation
Groups such as the Bat Conservation International aim to increase awareness of bats' ecological roles and the environmental threats they face. This group called for Bat Appreciation Week from October 24–31 every year to promote awareness of the ecological importance of bats. In the United Kingdom, all bats are protected under the Wildlife and Countryside Acts, and disturbing a bat or its roost can be punished with a heavy fine.
In Sarawak, Malaysia, "all bats" are protected under the Wildlife Protection Ordinance 1998, but species such as the hairless bat (Cheiromeles torquatus) are still eaten by the local communities. Humans have caused the extinction of several species of bat in modern history, the most recent being the Christmas Island pipistrelle (Pipistrellus murrayi), which was declared extinct in 2009.
Many people put up bat houses to attract bats. The 1991 University of Florida bat house is the largest occupied artificial roost in the world, with around 450,000–500,000 residents. In Britain, thick-walled and partly underground World War II pillboxes have been converted to make roosts for bats, and purpose-built 'bat bridges' are occasionally built to mitigate damage to habitat from roads or other developments. Cave gates are sometimes installed to limit human entry into caves with sensitive or endangered bat species. The gates are designed not to limit the airflow and thus to maintain the cave's micro-ecosystem. In the United States, 35 of the 47 bat species roost on human-made structures, while 14 of them use bat houses.
There is evidence that suggests that wind turbines might create sufficient barotrauma (pressure damage) to kill bats. Bats have typical mammalian lungs, which are thought to be more sensitive to sudden air pressure changes than the lungs of birds, making them more liable to fatal rupture. Bats may approach turbines to roost on them, increasing the death rate. Ultrasonic signals may help to deter bats from approaching wind farms, thus reducing deaths. The diagnosis and contribution of barotrauma to bat deaths near wind turbine blades have been disputed by other research comparing dead bats found near wind turbines with bats killed by impact with buildings in areas with no turbines.
The effects of climate change on bats are debated; a 2022 literature review concluded that, "Several biological and ecological traits of bats may make them sensitive to climate change, yet there is surprisingly little evidence on how these mammals respond to this anthropogenic environmental pressure." A 2025 study of European species found that bat populations may be shifting their ranges further north. Specifically, range suitability declined markedly in southern Europe while increasing at higher northern latitudes.
Interactions with humansCultural significance
Since bats are mammals that can fly, they are considered to be liminal beings in various traditions. In many cultures, including in Europe, bats are associated with darkness, death, witchcraft, and malevolence. Among Native Americans such as the Creek, Cherokee and Apache, the bat is identified as a trickster. An East Nigerian tale tells that the bat developed its nocturnal habits after causing the death of his partner, the bush rat, and now hides by day to avoid arrest.
More positive depictions of bats exist in some cultures. In China, bats have been associated with happiness, joy and good fortune, and symbolise the "Five Blessings": longevity, riches, health, love of virtue and a peaceful passing away. The bat is sacred in Tonga and is considered the property of the king. Mayan people associated bats with the gateway to the realm of the gods since they live in caves. In the Zapotec civilisation, the bat god presided over corn and fertility.

The Weird Sisters in Shakespeare's Macbeth used the fur of a bat in their brew. In Western culture, the bat is often a symbol of the night and its foreboding nature. The bat is a primary animal associated with fictional characters of the night, both villainous vampires, such as Count Dracula and the earlier Varney the Vampire, and heroes, such as the DC Comics character Batman.
The bat is sometimes used as a heraldic symbol in many European countries, including France, Belgium, Germany, Spain and the UK. They have also been used as symbols in the militaries of the UK, US and Israel. Three US states have an official state bat. Texas and Oklahoma are represented by the Mexican free-tailed bat, while Virginia is represented by the Virginia big-eared bat (Corynorhinus townsendii virginianus).
Uses and benefits
Consumption of bats has occurred globally, particularly in parts of Asia and Africa and on some islands in the Pacific and Caribbean. The animals may be eaten for their perceived medical benefits or as a delicacy. Western cookbooks have mentioned grilled bats and fruit bat soup. Bat dung, a type of guano, is rich in nitrates and is mined from caves for use as fertiliser.
Insectivorous bats in particular are especially helpful to farmers, as they control populations of agricultural pests and reduce the need to use pesticides. It has been estimated that bats save the agricultural industry of the United States anywhere from $3.7-53 billion per year in pesticides and damage to crops. This also prevents the overuse of pesticides, which can pollute the surrounding environment and may lead to resistance in future generations of insects.  Some bats are predators of mosquitoes, suppressing the transmission of mosquito-borne diseases. Bats have also been tourist attractions, including the Congress Avenue Bridge in Austin, Texas, where over a million Mexican free-tailed bats roost.


The Mammal Paleogene zones or MP zones are a system of biostratigraphic biozones in the stratigraphic record used to correlate mammal-bearing fossil localities of the Paleogene period of Europe. It consists of thirty consecutive zones (numbered MP 1 through MP 30; MN 8 and 9 have been joined into MN 8 + 9 zone; and MP 17 zone is split into two zones – MP 17A and MP 17B zone) defined through reference faunas, well-known sites that other localities can be correlated with. MP 1 is the earliest zone, and MP 30 is the most recent. The Grande Coupure extinction and faunal turnover event marks the boundary between MP 20 and MP 21, the post-Grande Coupure faunas occurring by MP 21 onward. The MP zones are complementary with the MN zones in the Neogene.
These zones were proposed at the Congress in Mainz held in 1987 to help paleontologists provide more specific reference points to evolutionary events in Europe, but are used by paleontologists on other continents as well.

The zones are as follows:


The African land mammal ages (AFLMA) system is a geologic timescale for African land mammal faunas of the Cenozoic Era. Based on biostratigraphic systems in use for mammal fossils on other continents, each AFLMA is defined at its base by a type locality with a distinctive fauna, rather than any particular species. Faunal zones have been in use in Cenozoic African paleontology since the 1980s, but the comprehensive AFLMA system was only established in 2020.
List of AFLMAs
The list of AFLMAs from youngest (stratigraphically highest) to oldest (stratigraphically lowest):
Other continental ages
North American land mammal age
South American land mammal age
European land mammal age
Asian land mammal age


Mink are dark-coloured, semiaquatic, carnivorous mammals in the genera Mustela and Neogale and part of the family Mustelidae, which also includes weasels, stoats, martens, otters, badgers, and others. There are two extant species referred to as "mink", the American mink and the European mink. The extinct sea mink was related to the American mink but was much larger.
The American mink's fur has been highly prized for use in clothing. Their treatment on fur farms has been a focus of animal rights and animal welfare activism. American mink have established feral populations in Europe (including Great Britain and Denmark) and South America. In some cases this happened after the animals were released from mink farms by animal rights activists, in others, mink escaped from captivity by themselves. In the UK, under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981, it is illegal to release mink into the wild. In some countries, any live mink caught in traps must be humanely killed.
American mink are believed by some to have contributed to the decline of the less hardy European mink through competition (though not through hybridisation; European mink are more closely related to polecats than to North American mink). Trapping is used to control or eliminate introduced American mink populations.
Mink oil is used in some medical products and cosmetics, as well as to treat, preserve, and waterproof leather.
Species
The American mink (Neogale vison) is larger and more adaptable than the European mink (Mustela lutreola)  but, due to variations in size, an individual mink usually cannot be determined as European or American with certainty without looking at the skeleton. However, all European mink have a large white patch on their upper lip, whereas only some American mink have this marking. Therefore, any mink without the patch is certainly of the American species. Taxonomically, both American and European mink were placed in the same genus Mustela but the American mink was reclassified as belonging to its own genus, Neovison, though it has recently been reclassified alongside several other weasels into the genus Neogale.
The sea mink (Neogale macrodon), native to the New England area, is considered to be a close relative of the American mink. Its extinction in the late 19th century, was chiefly result of hunting for the fur trade.
Description
A wild male mink weighs about 1 kg (2 lb 3 oz) and is about 60 cm (23+1⁄2 in) in length. Farm-bred males can reach 3.2 kg (7 lb 1 oz). The female weighs about 600 g (1 lb 5 oz) and reaches a length of about 50 cm (19+1⁄2 in). The sizes above do not include the tail, which can be from 12.8 to 22.8 cm (5+1⁄16 to 9 in).
A mink's rich glossy coat in its wild state is brown and looks silky. Farm-bred mink can vary from white to almost black, which is reflected in the feral mink in Britain. Their natural pelage is deep, rich brown, with or without white spots on the underparts, and consists of a slick, dense underfur overlaid with dark, glossy, almost stiff guard hairs.
Mink show the curious phenomenon of delayed implantation. Although the true gestation period is 39 days, the embryo may stop developing for a variable period, so that as long as 76 days may elapse before the litter arrives. Between 45 and 52 days is normal. There is only one litter per year. They typically have between six and 10 kits per litter. Litters as large as 16 have been recorded at fur farms.
The maximum lifespan of a mink is usually around ten years, but rarely exceeds three years in the wild.
Diet
Mink prey on fish and other aquatic life, small mammals, birds, and eggs; adults may eat young mink. Mink raised on farms primarily eat expired cheese, eggs, fish, meat and poultry slaughterhouse byproducts, dog food, and turkey livers, as well as prepared commercial foods. A farm with 3,000 mink may use as much as two tons of food per day.
Habitats
Mink like to live near water and are seldom found far from riverbanks, lakes, and marshes. Even when roaming, they tend to follow streams and ditches. Sometimes they leave the water altogether for a few hundred metres, especially when looking for rabbits, one of their favourite foods. In some places, particularly in Scotland and in Iceland, they live along the seashore. Sometimes they live in towns if suitable water is available. Mink may be active at all hours, even when people are nearby.
Territory
Mink are territorial animals. A male mink will not tolerate another male within his territory but appears to be less aggressive towards females. Generally, the territories of both male and female animals are separate, but a female's territory may sometimes overlap with that of a male.

The territories, which tend to be long and narrow, stretch along river banks, or around the edges of lakes or marshes. Territory sizes vary, but they can be several miles long. Female territories are smaller than those of males.
Each territory has one or two central areas (core areas) where the mink spends most of its time. The core area is usually associated with a good food supply, such as a pool rich in fish, or a good rabbit warren. The mink may stay in its core area, which can be quite small, for several days at a time, but it also makes excursions to the ends of its territory. These excursions seem to be associated with the defense of the territory against intruders. The mink likely checks for any signs of a stranger mink and leaves droppings (scat) with its own personal scent to reinforce its territorial rights.
Human usesFarming
The American mink's fur has been highly prized for use in clothing, with hunting giving way to farming. Their treatment on fur farms has been a focus of animal rights and animal welfare activism. American mink have established populations in Europe (including Great Britain) and South America, after being released from mink farms by animal rights activists, or otherwise escaping from captivity. In the UK, under the Wildlife & Countryside Act 1981, it is illegal to release mink into the wild. In some countries, any live mink caught in traps must be humanely killed.
In February 2022, the US House of Representatives passed a ban on commercial mink farming following the global SARS-CoV-2 outbreak on mink farms, however it did not pass the Senate so did not become law. The ban was attempted in an effort to protect public health in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. Mink farms pose a risk of producing SARS-CoV-2 variants that could be transmitted to humans. The cramped living conditions along with the high volume of immunosuppressed mink inhabiting the farms creates a highly hospitable environment for the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Approximately 6.1 million mink have  been infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus, with three variants traced back to farms in the U.S, France, and Denmark.
Ireland
There are three mink farms in Ireland, in Donegal, Kerry, and Laois. Mink farming was introduced into the country by two veterinarians. Three thousand mink were released by campaigners into the wild from a farm in the 1960s. It is estimated that there are 33,500 wild mink in Ireland.
The Irish Department of Agriculture stated in November 2020 that the Department of Health had advised, following the detection of coronavirus among animals on a Danish mink farm, that the roughly 120,000 farmed Irish mink should be culled. Mink farming was already due to be discontinued under the 2020 Programme for Government but the coronavirus risk expedited the closure of the industry.
DenmarkHealth concerns
Mink are among the animals that can be infected with SARS-CoV-2 and that are also known to spread infections among themselves and to humans. Transmission of the SARS-CoV-2 virus from mink to humans was first documented in the Netherlands through genetic tracing, which prompted the government to advance to the end of 2020 a ban on mink farming scheduled for 2024. The United States Department of Agriculture confirmed that cases of minks infected with COVID-19 had been documented in Utah in August 2020.
In November 2020, Denmark, then the world's largest producer of mink fur, slaughtered its entire mink population of 15 to 17 million animals to stop the spread of Cluster 5, a mutated strain of the virus, which has been linked to the animals and resulted in the infection of 12 humans with the mutated variant. The decision was later deemed to have been illegal, although the law was later changed in support of the action. Infections within mink were also deemed ancestral to a highly mutated SARS-CoV-2 strain found in Canadian white-tailed deer which subsequently spilled back into humans.
Similar to their role of a viral incubator in the COVID-19 pandemic, in October 2022, mink at a farm in Spain became the first observed case of mammal-to-mammal transmission of Influenza A virus subtype H5N1, an avian flu which had only previously jumped to mammals upon close contact or consumption of infected birds. The infected mink in Spain exhibited multiple new mutations when compared to viral sequences obtained from infected birds, one of which helps H5N1 to better replicate within mammals.
Stereotypy
On farms, minks are placed in battery cages, a type of soft, metal wire cage that restricts their ability to move. This often results in a condition referred to as stereotypies, an abnormal behaviour. These abnormal, repetitive behaviours are a result of keeping them imprisoned, and is similar to the deterioration of mental health in humans. Stereotypies have also been noted to increase during human presence.
To attempt to eliminate stereotypies in captive mink, the Canadian National Farm Animal Care Council has implemented regulations on incorporating environmental enrichments into mink cages. Enrichments are pen-related alterations or the addition of novel objects to improve the mink's physical and psychological health. Enrichments may help reduce the onset of stereotypies, but rarely decrease or eliminate them entirely. Leaving minks alone plays a large role in the prevention of stereotypies, and the animals' well-being.


Tasmanian mammals are divided into three major groups based on reproductive techniques: egg laying mammals (the monotremes), pouched mammals (the marsupials), and placental mammals. This is a list of mammals of Tasmania:
Order: Monotremata (monotremes)
Family: Ornithorhynchidae
Genus: Ornithorhynchus
Platypus, Ornithorhynchus anatinus LC
Family: Tachyglossidae
Genus: Tachyglossus
Short-beaked echidna, Tachyglossus aculeatus LC
Infraclass: Marsupialia (marsupials)Order: Dasyuromorphia (marsupial carnivores)
Family: Thylacinidae
Genus: Thylacinus
Thylacine, T. cynocephalus EX endemic
Family: Dasyuridae
Subfamily: Dasyurinae
Tribe: Dasyurinae
Genus: Dasyurus
Tiger quoll, D. maculatus NT
Eastern quoll, D. viverrinus EN endemic (introduced to Australian mainland)
Genus: Sarcophilus
Tasmanian devil, S. harrisii EN endemic
Tribe: Phascogalini
Genus: Antechinus
Swamp antechinus, A. minimus EN
Dusky antechinus, A. swainsonii EN
Subfamily: Sminthopsinae
Tribe: Sminthopsini
Genus: Sminthopsis
White-footed dunnart, S. leucopus VU
Order: Peramelemorphia (bandicoots and bilbies)
Family: Peramelidae
Subfamily: Peramelinae
Genus: Isoodon
Southern brown bandicoot, Isoodon obesulus LC
Genus: Perameles
Eastern barred bandicoot, Perameles gunnii NT
Order: DiprotodontiaSuborder: Vombatiformes (wombats and koalas)
Family: Vombatidae
Genus: Vombatus
Common wombat, Vombatus ursinus LC
Suborder: Phalangeriformes (possums and gliders)
Family: Phalangeridae
Genus: Trichosurus
Common brushtail possum, Trichosurus vulpecula LC
Family: Burramyidae
Genus: Cercartetus
Tasmanian pygmy possum, Cercartetus lepidus LC
Eastern pygmy possum, Cercartetus nanus LC
Family: Petauridae
Genus: Petaurus
Krefft's glider, Petaurus notatus introduced (Australian mainland native)
Family: Pseudocheiridae
Genus: Pseudocheirus
Common ringtail possum, Pseudocheirus peregrinus LC
Suborder: Macropodiformes (kangaroos and wallabies)
Family: Potoroidae
Genus: Bettongia
Southern bettong, Bettongia gaimardi endemic NT
Genus: Potorous
Long-nosed potoroo, Potorous tridactylus LC
Family: Macropodidae
Genus: Macropus
Eastern grey kangaroo, Macropus giganteus LC
Genus: Notamacropus
Red-necked wallaby, N. rufogriseus LC
Genus: Thylogale
Tasmanian pademelon, Thylogale billardierii endemic LC
Infraclass: Eutheria (placentals)Order: Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates)
Family: Cervidae
Subfamily: Cervinae
Genus: Dama
Common fallow deer, Dama dama introduced
Order: Carnivora
Family: Otariidae (eared seals)
Genus: Arctocephalus
Cape fur seal, Arctocephalus pusillus LC
New Zealand fur seal, Arctocephalus fosteri LC
Family: Phocidae (true seals)
Genus: Mirounga
Southern elephant seal, Mirounga leonina LC
Genus: Hydrurga
Leopard seal, Hydrurga leptonyx LC
Order: Chiroptera (bats)
Family: Vespertilionidae
Genus: Vespadelus
Little forest bat, Vespadelus vulturnus LR/lc
Southern forest bat, Vespadelus regulus LR/lc
Large forest bat, Vespadelus darlingtoni LR/lc
Genus: Chalinolobus
Chocolate wattled bat, Chalinolobus morio LC
Gould's wattled bat, Chalinolobus gouldii LR/lc
Genus: Nyctophilus
Lesser long-eared bat, Nyctophilus geoffroyi LC
Greater long-eared bat, Nyctophilus timoriensis DD
Genus: Falsistrellus
Eastern false pipistrelle, Falsistrellus tasmaniensis LC
Lagomorpha
Family: Leporidae (rabbits and hares)
Genus: Oryctolagus
European rabbit, Oryctolagus cuniculus introduced
Genus: Lepus
European hare, Lepus europaeus introduced
Rodentia (rats and mice)
Family: Muridae
Genus: Hydromys
Rakali, Hydromys chrysogaster LC
Genus: Mus
House mouse, Mus musculus LC introduced
Genus: Pseudomys
Long-tailed mouse, Pseudomys higginsi LR/lc endemic
New Holland mouse, Pseudomys novaehollandiae VU
Genus: Mastacomys
Broad-toothed mouse, Mastacomys fuscus NT
Genus: Rattus
Swamp rat, Rattus lutreolus LR/lc
Black rat, Rattus rattus LC introduced
Brown rat, Rattus norvegicus LC introduced
Order: Cetacea (whales and dolphins)Suborder: Odontoceti (toothed whales)
Family: Delphinidae (dolphins)
Genus: Globicephala
Long-finned pilot whale, Globicephala melaena DD
Genus: Orcinus
Killer whale, Orcinus orca DD
Genus: Pseudorca
False killer whale, Pseudorca crassidens DD
Genus: Delphinus
Short-beaked common dolphin, Delphinus delphis LC
Genus: Tursiops
Common bottlenose dolphin, Tursiops truncatus LC
Family: Physeteridae (sperm whales)
Genus: Physeter
Sperm whale, Physeter catodon VU
Parvorder: Mysticeti (baleen whales)
Family: Balaenidae (right whales)
Genus: Eubalaena
Southern right whale, Eubalaena australis LC
Genus: Caperea
Pygmy right whale, Caperea marginata DD
Genus: Megaptera
Humpback whale, Megaptera novaeangliae LC


Rodents (from Latin rodens 'gnawing') are a group of mammals belonging to the order Rodentia ( roh-DEN-shə or roh-DEN-chə) characterized by a single pair of continuously growing incisors in each of the upper and lower jaws. Rodents make up about 40% of all mammal species. Rodents are native to all major landmasses except Antarctica and a handful of isolated oceanic islands — though humans have since introduced them to nearly all of these places too. Most rodents are small animals with robust bodies, short limbs, and long tails. They use their sharp incisors to gnaw food, excavate burrows, and defend themselves. Most eat plant material, but some have more varied diets.
Rodents are extremely diverse in their ecology and lifestyles and can be found in almost every terrestrial habitat, including human-made environments. Species can be arboreal, fossorial (burrowing), saltatorial/ricochetal (leaping on their hind legs), or semiaquatic. They tend to be social animals, and many species live in societies with complex ways of communicating with each other. Mating among rodents can vary from monogamy, to polygyny, to promiscuity. Many have litters of underdeveloped, altricial young, while others are precocial (relatively well-developed) at birth.
The rodent fossil record dates back to the Paleocene of Asia. Rodents greatly diversified in the Eocene, as they spread across continents, sometimes even crossing oceans. Rodents reached both South America and Madagascar from Africa and, until the arrival of Homo sapiens, were the only terrestrial placental mammals to reach and colonize Australia. Rodentia and Lagomorpha (rabbits, hares, and pikas) are sister groups, sharing a single common ancestor and forming the clade of Glires. Lagomorphs also have incisors that grow continuously, but are distinguished by an extra pair of incisors on the upper jaw.
Rodents have been used as food, for clothing, as pets, and as laboratory animals in research. Some species, in particular the brown rat, the black rat, and the house mouse, are serious pests, eating and spoiling food stored by humans and spreading diseases. Accidentally introduced species of rodents are often considered to be invasive. Well-known rodents include mice, rats, squirrels, prairie dogs, porcupines, beavers, guinea pigs, and hamsters.
Characteristics
The distinguishing feature of the rodents is their pairs of continuously growing, sharpened incisors. Enamel covers the front of the incisor, but the back is uncovered. Because they do not stop growing, the animal must continuously wear them down by gnawing. Otherwise, they can become so long that they pierce the skull. As the incisors grind against each other, the softer dentine on the rear of the teeth wears away more quickly, leaving the sharp enamel edge shaped like the blade of a chisel. Rodent species have 12–28 teeth total, usually fewer than 22, with no canines. A gap, or diastema, is present between the incisors and the cheek teeth. This allows rodents to suck in and block out inedible material as the incisors chip it off. Chinchillas and guinea pigs have a high-fiber diet; their molars lack roots and grow continuously like their incisors.
The complexly ridged surface of the rodent molar is well-equipped for grinding food into small particles. The jaw musculature is strong. The lower jaw is thrust forward while gnawing and shifts backward during chewing. The incisors do the gnawing while molars chew; however, due to the cranial anatomy of rodents, these feeding methods cannot be used at the same time. Among rodents, the masseter muscle plays a key role in chewing, making up 60% – 80% of the total muscle mass among masticatory muscles.
In rodents, masseter muscles are attached behind the eyes and contribute to eye-boggling that occurs during gnawing, where the quick contraction and relaxation of the muscles cause the eyeballs to move up and down. Variations in the zygomasseteric system are associated with different specializations in the chewing apparatus. Sciuromorphous rodents, such as the eastern grey squirrel, have a large deep masseter, making them efficient at biting with the incisors. Hystricomorphous rodents, such as the guinea pig, have larger superficial masseter muscles and smaller deep masseter muscles than rats or squirrels, possibly making them less efficient at biting with the incisors. However, their enlarged internal pterygoid muscles may allow them to move the jaw further sideways when chewing. Myomorphous rodents, such as the brown rat, have enlarged temporalis and masseter muscles, making them efficient with both gnawing and chewing.
While the largest species, the capybara, can reach 66 kg (146 lb), most species weigh less than 100 g (3.5 oz). Rodents have wide-ranging morphologies but typically have stout bodies and short limbs. The forefeet usually have five digits, including an opposable thumb, while the hind feet have three to five digits. The elbow gives the forearms great flexibility. The majority of species are plantigrade, walking on the whole foot, and have claw-like nails that vary in size. Rodents have nails on their first digit, which they use in food handling. Such a nail combined with dexterous feeding movement with incisors allows them to eat hard seeds and nuts, a niche that they presently dominate. This thumbnail is argued to be ancestral with exceptions being linked to its replacement by claws in burrowing and for oral-only feeding.
Rodent species use a wide variety of methods of locomotion, including quadrupedal walking, running, burrowing, climbing, bipedal hopping (kangaroo rats and hopping mice), swimming, and even gliding. Flying squirrels can glide from tree to tree using parachute-like membranes that stretch from the fore to the hind limbs. The agouti is fleet-footed and antelope-like, being digitigrade with hoof-like nails. The majority of rodents have tails, which can be of many shapes and sizes. Some tails are prehensile, as in the Eurasian harvest mouse, and the fur on the tails can vary from bushy to mostly bald. Some species have vestigial or non-visible tails. In some species, the tail is capable of regeneration if a part is broken off.
Rodents generally have well-developed senses of smell and hearing, and the eyes are enlarged in species that are active at night. Many species have long, sensitive whiskers, or vibrissae, for touch or "whisking". Whisker action is mostly driven by the brain stem, which is itself provoked by the cortex, though alternative routes have been found. Many species have cheek pouches for storing food. In squirrels and species of Muroidea, these structures are extensions of the oral cavity, while in gophers and the Heteromyidae, they are separate. Both types reach the shoulders. The digestive system is efficient enough to absorb nearly 80% of the energy in their food. When eating cellulose, the food is softened in the stomach and directed to the cecum, where bacteria reduce it to its carbohydrate elements. The rodent then practices coprophagy, eating its own fecal pellets, so the nutrients can be absorbed by the gut. The final fecal pellet is hard and dry. They may entirely lack the ability to vomit. In many species, the penis contains a bone, the baculum, and the testes can be located either abdominally or at the groin.
Sexual dimorphism occurs in many rodent species. In some rodents, males are larger than females, while in others the reverse is true. The former is typical for ground squirrels, kangaroo rats, solitary mole-rats, and pocket gophers; it likely developed due to sexual selection, with larger males being more reproductively successful. Female-bias sexual dimorphism exists among chipmunks and jumping mice. Its function is not understood, but in the case of yellow-pine chipmunks, males may choose larger females due to their greater fitness. In some species, such as voles, sexual dimorphism can vary from population to population. In bank voles, females are usually the larger sex, but males may be larger in certain alpine populations, possibly because of the lack of predators and greater competition between them.
Distribution and habitat
Rodents have a near global distribution, inhabiting every continent except Antarctica. They are the only terrestrial placental mammals to have colonized Australia and New Guinea without human intervention. Humans have also allowed the animals to spread to many remote oceanic islands. Rodents have adapted to almost every terrestrial habitat, from cold tundra (under snow) to hot deserts. Species range from arboreal (tree-dwelling) to fossorial (underground) and semiaquatic. Rodents have also thrived in human-created environments such as agricultural and urban areas.
Though some species are common pests for humans, rodents also play important ecological roles. Burrowing rodents may eat the fruiting bodies of fungi and spread spores through their feces, thereby allowing the fungi to disperse and form symbiotic relationships with the roots of plants (which usually cannot thrive without them). As such, these rodents may help preserve healthy forests. Some rodents are considered keystone species and ecosystem engineers in their respective habitats. In the Great Plains of North America, the burrowing activities of prairie dogs play an important role in grassland habitats, contributing to soil aeration, which leads to more organic material and water absorption. Similarly in many temperate regions, beavers play an essential hydrological role. When building their dams and lodges, beavers alter the paths of streams and rivers and allow for the creation of wetland habitats.
Behavior and life historyFeeding
Most rodents are herbivorous, feeding exclusively on plant material, while others are omnivorous, and a few are predators. The field vole is a typical herbivorous rodent and feeds on grasses, herbs, root tubers, moss, and other vegetation, and gnaws on bark during the winter. It occasionally eats invertebrates such as insect larvae. The plains pocket gopher eats grasses, roots, and tubers in its cheek pouches and caches them in underground larder chambers. The Texas pocket gopher avoids emerging onto the surface to feed by pulling plants above them into their burrows by the roots. It also practices coprophagy. The African pouched rat forages on the surface, gathering anything that might be edible into its capacious cheek pouches until they fully stretch. It then returns to its burrow to sort through the material it has gathered and eats the nutritious items.
Agouti species are one of the few animal groups that can break open the large capsules of the Brazil nut fruit. Too many seeds are inside the fruit to be consumed in one meal, so the agouti carries some off and caches them. This helps dispersal of the seeds, as any that the agouti fails to retrieve are distant from the parent tree when they germinate. Desert-dwelling seed eaters like kangaroo rats must gather as many as they can since they are only available for a limited time. Some rodents eat as much as possible to store fat reserves for the long winter hibernation. Marmots do this, and may be 50% heavier in the autumn than in the spring. Beavers, which feed on tree bark and vegetation, store their winter food in "rafts", piles of wood immersed in water.

Although rodents have been regarded traditionally as herbivores, most small rodents opportunistically include insects, worms, snails, mussels, and even vertebrates in their diets, and a few have become specialized to rely on a diet of animal matter, such as the shrewlike rats, the rakali, and the grasshopper mouse. A functional-morphological study of the rodent tooth system supports the idea that primitive rodents were omnivores rather than herbivores. Studies of the literature show that numerous members of the Sciuromorpha and Myomorpha, and a few members of the Hystricomorpha, have either included animal matter in their diets or been prepared to eat such food when offered it in captivity. Examination of the stomach contents of the North American white-footed mouse showed 34% animal matter. The grasshopper mouse, which feeds on insects, scorpions, and other small mice, can kill prey as large as itself.
Social behavior
The majority of rodent species are social or gregarious, notably prairie dogs and brown rats, while more solitary species include hamsters and red squirrels. The pocket gophers are also solitary outside the breeding season, each individual digging a complex tunnel system and maintaining a territory. Solitary behavior may be linked to the presence of resources that can be claimed and defended. Brown rats usually live in small colonies with up to six females sharing a burrow and one male defending a territory around the burrow. At high population densities, this system breaks down, and males show a hierarchical system of dominance with overlapping ranges. Female offspring remain in the colony while male young disperse. Beavers live in extended family units typically with a pair of adults and their young, including those born in the current and previous year or even older. Prairie vole societies consist of both monogamous pairs and communal groups where only a dominant female breeds. Pairs will join with communal groups during the winter.

Among the most social of rodents are the ground squirrels, which typically form colonies based on female kinship, with males dispersing after weaning and becoming nomadic as adults. Cooperation in ground squirrels varies between species and typically includes making alarm calls,  protecting nesting areas, and preventing infanticide. The prairie dogs live in colonies, or 'towns', which can stretch for kilometers all around and number in the thousands. These consist of territorial family groups known as "coteries" that occupy separate burrows. A coterie often consists of an adult male, three or four adult females, and offspring, including yearlings and juveniles. Individuals within coteries are friendly with each other, but hostile towards outsiders.
Perhaps the most extreme examples of colonial behavior in rodents are the naked mole-rat and Damaraland mole-rat, which are eusocial like colonial insects. These species live in underground colonies, which can number in the hundreds in the case of the naked mole-rat. In both species, colonies consist of one breeding female and a few males, while the rest are non-reproductive, their fertility being suppressed. The non-reproductive members dig, maintain, and seal tunnels, as well as gather food and help with the young.
CommunicationSmell
Rodents use scent marking in many social contexts, including inter- and intra-species communication, the marking of trails, and the establishment of territories. Much can be learned about an individual from their urine, including their species, individual identity, sex, reproductive status, health, and social rank. Compounds derived from the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) bind to several urinary proteins. The odor of a predator reduces scent-marking behavior.
Rodents are able to recognize close relatives by smell, and this allows them to show nepotism (preferential behavior toward their kin) and avoid inbreeding. This kin recognition is by olfactory cues from urine, feces, and glandular secretions. The main assessment may involve the MHC, where the degree of relatedness of two individuals is correlated to the MHC genes they have in common. In non-kin communication, where more permanent odor markers are required, as at territorial borders, then non-volatile major urinary proteins (MUPs), which function as pheromone transporters, may also be used. MUPs may also advertise individual identity, with each male house mouse (Mus musculus) having uniquely encoded MUPs in its urine.
House mice urinate to mark territory and advertise their individual and group identity. Territorial beavers and red squirrels react more to the scents of strangers than those of their neighbors. This is known as the "dear enemy effect".
Sound
Many rodent species, particularly those that are diurnal and social, have a wide range of alarm calls that are emitted when they perceive threats. There are both direct and indirect benefits of doing this. A potential predator may stop when it knows it has been detected, or an alarm call can allow related individuals or others of the same species to take evasive action. Prairie dogs in particular have complex anti-predator alarm call systems. These species may have different calls for different predators (e.g., aerial predators or ground-based predators), and each call contains information about the nature of the precise threat. The urgency of the threat can also be conveyed by the acoustic properties of the call.
Social rodents have a wider range of vocalizations than do solitary species. At least fifteen separate call types have been recorded in adult Kataba mole-rats and four in juveniles. Similarly, the common degu, another social, burrowing rodent, exhibits an elaborate vocal range comprising fifteen different vocalizations. Ultrasonic calls play a part in social communication between dormice and are used when the individuals are out of sight of each other.
House mice use both audible and ultrasonic calls in a variety of contexts. Audible vocalizations can often be heard during agonistic or aggressive encounters, whereas ultrasound is used in sexual communication and also by pups when they have fallen out of the nest.

Laboratory rats (which are brown rats, Rattus norvegicus) emit short, high-frequency, ultrasonic vocalizations during purportedly pleasurable experiences such as rough-and-tumble play, during mating, and when tickled. The vocalization, described as a distinct "chirping", has been likened to laughter and is interpreted as an expectation of something rewarding. In clinical studies, the chirping is associated with positive emotional feelings, and social bonding occurs with the tickler, resulting in the rats becoming conditioned to seek the tickling. However, as the rats age, the tendency to chirp declines.
Visual
Rodents are typical of placental mammals in having only two types of light-receptive cones in their retina (dichromacy); in their case, a short-wavelength "blue-UV" type and a middle-wavelength "green" type. However, they are visually sensitive to the ultraviolet (UV) spectrum and therefore can see light that humans cannot. The functions of this UV sensitivity are not always clear. In degus, for example, more UV light reflects from the belly fur, allowing it to signal to other degus when it stands on its hind legs. The back fur is less reflective, so the degu stands on all fours when a predator is near. Ultraviolet light is more visible during the day, making UV vision more advantageous for diurnal species.
The urine of many rodents (e.g., voles, degus, mice, rats) strongly reflects UV light, and this may be used in communication by leaving visible as well as olfactory markings. However, it can also be detected by predators; the common kestrel can see fresh vole urine via UV light and determine their abundance.
Touch
Some rodents communicate with surface vibrations, known as seismic communication. The fossorial Middle East blind mole-rat communicates over long distances by head thumping. Foot drumming is used widely as a predator warning or defensive action. It is used primarily by fossorial or semi-fossorial rodents. The banner-tailed kangaroo rat produces several complex foot-drumming patterns in a number of different contexts, one of which is when it encounters a snake. The foot drumming may alert nearby offspring but most likely conveys that the rat is too alert for a successful attack, forcing the snake to not pursue. Several studies have indicated intentional use of ground vibrations as a means of intra-specific communication during courtship among the Cape mole-rat.
Mating strategies
Some species of rodent are monogamous, with an adult male and female forming a lasting pair bond. Monogamy can come in two forms: obligate and facultative. In obligate monogamy, both parents care for the offspring and play an important part in their survival. This occurs in species such as California deermice, oldfield mice, Malagasy giant rats, and beavers. In these species, males usually mate only with their partners. In addition to increased care for young, obligate monogamy can also be beneficial to the adult male as it increases the chances of having a mate, particularly a fertile one. In facultative monogamy, the males do not provide direct parental care and are forced to mate with one female due to more dispersed social spacing. Prairie voles appear to be an example of this form of monogamy, with males guarding and defending females within their vicinity.
In polygynous species, males will try to monopolize and mate with multiple females. As with monogamy, polygyny in rodents can come in two forms: defense and non-defense. Defense polygyny involves males defending areas where females are spatially clumped as territories. This occurs in ground squirrels like yellow-bellied marmots, California ground squirrels, Columbian ground squirrels, and Richardson's ground squirrels. Males with territories are known as "resident" males, and the females that live within the territories are known as "resident" females. In the case of marmots, resident males do not appear to ever lose their territories and always repel invading males. Some species are also known to directly defend their resident females, and the ensuing fights can lead to serious injuries. In species with non-defense polygyny, males are not territorial and wander widely in search of females. These males establish dominance hierarchies, with the high-ranking males having access to the most females. This occurs in species like Belding's ground squirrels and some tree squirrel species.

Promiscuity, in which both males and females mate with multiple partners, also occurs in rodents. In species such as Gunnison's prairie dogs, females give birth to litters with multiple paternities. Promiscuity leads to increased sperm competition, and males tend to have larger testicles. In the Cape ground squirrel, the male's testes can be 20 percent of its head-body length. Several rodent species have flexible mating systems that can vary between monogamy, polygyny, and promiscuity.
Female rodents play an active role in choosing their mates. Factors that contribute to female preference may include the fitness, dominance, and spatial awareness of the male. In the eusocial naked mole-rats, a single female monopolizes mating from the breeding males. Reproductively active female naked mole-rats are more discriminating in the males they associate with, preferring non-relatives; this is likely a protective measure against inbreeding.
In most rodent species, ovulation is cyclical, while a minority of species have it induced by mating. Males of some rodent species leave behind a mating plug, which blocks both sperm leakage and other males from inseminating the female. Females can remove the plug and may do so right after mating or after several hours.
Birth and parenting
Rodents may be born either altricial (blind, hairless, and relatively underdeveloped) or precocial (mostly furred, eyes open, and fairly developed) depending on the species. The altricial state is typical for squirrels and mice, while the precocial state usually occurs in species like guinea pigs and porcupines. Females with altricial young typically construct complex nests for their young, lasting from before birth until they are weaned. The female gives birth sitting or lying down, and the young emerge in the direction she is facing. Starting at a few days old, when their eyes first open, offspring can periodically venture outside.
In precocial species, the mothers invest little in nest building, and some do not build nests at all. The female gives birth standing as the offspring emerge behind her. Mothers maintain contact with their highly mobile young with contact calls. Though relatively independent and weaned within days, precocial young may continue to nurse and be groomed by their mothers. Rodent litter sizes also vary, with smaller litters having longer maternal care than larger ones.

Mother rodents provide both direct parental care (such as nursing, feeding, grooming, warmth, transportation, socialization, and expelling) and indirect parenting (such as food storing, nest building, and protection) to their offspring. In many social species, young may be cared for by individuals other than their parents, a practice known as alloparenting or cooperative breeding. This is known to occur in black-tailed prairie dogs and Belding's ground squirrels, where mothers have communal nests and nurse unrelated young along with their own. There is some question as to whether these mothers can distinguish which young are theirs. In the Patagonian mara, young are also placed in communal warrens, but mothers do not permit youngsters other than their own to nurse.
Infanticide exists in numerous rodent species and may be practiced by adult conspecifics of either sex. Several reasons have been proposed for this behavior, including nutrition, resource competition, avoiding caring for alien young, and, in the case of males, attempting to make the mother sexually receptive. The latter reason is more studied in primates and lions. Infanticide appears to be widespread in black-tailed prairie dogs, accounting for around half of litter deaths and usually done by resident, lactating females. To protect against infanticide from other adults, female rodents may employ avoidance or direct aggression (including in groups) against potential perpetrators, multiple mating, territoriality, or early abortions. In alpine marmots, dominant females tend to suppress the reproduction of subordinates by harassing them while they are pregnant. The resulting stress decreases their reproductive health.
Intelligence
Rodents have advanced cognitive abilities. They can recognize poisoned baits, making pest control difficult. Guinea pigs can learn and remember complex pathways to food. Squirrels and kangaroo rats are able to locate caches of food by spatial memory, rather than just by smell.
Because laboratory mice (house mice) and rats (brown rats) are widely used as scientific models to further our understanding of biology, a great deal has come to be known about their cognitive capacities. Brown rats exhibit cognitive bias, where information processing is biased by whether they are in a positive or negative affective state. For example, laboratory rats trained to respond to a specific tone by pressing a lever to receive a reward, and to press another lever in response to a different tone so as to avoid receiving an electric shock, are more likely to respond to an intermediate tone by choosing the reward lever if they have just been tickled (something they enjoy), indicating "a link between the directly measured positive affective state and decision making under uncertainty in an animal model".
Laboratory (brown) rats may have the capacity for metacognition—to consider their own learning and then make decisions based on what they know, or do not know, as indicated by choices they make, apparently trading off difficulty of tasks and expected rewards, making them the first animals other than primates known to have this capacity, but these findings are disputed, since the rats may have been following simple operant conditioning principles or a behavioral economic model. Brown rats use social learning in a wide range of situations, but perhaps especially so in acquiring food preferences.
Evolutionary history
The earliest fossil record of mammals with the characteristic rodent dentition comes from the Paleocene, shortly after the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs some 66 million years ago. These fossils are found in Laurasia, the supercontinent composed of modern-day North America, Europe, and Asia. The divergence of Glires, a clade consisting of rodents and lagomorphs (rabbits, hares, and pikas), from other placental mammals occurred within a few million years after the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary; rodents and lagomorphs then spread during the Cenozoic. Some molecular clock data suggest modern rodents (members of the order Rodentia) had appeared by the late Cretaceous, although other molecular divergence estimations are in agreement with the fossil record. Rodents may have outcompeted and replaced multituberculates, but this is debated.
Fossils of an early ancestor of the sciuromorph rodents, Acritoparamys atavus, have been found in the deposits of early Paleocene North America, and sciuromorphs were widespread by the late Eocene. The Castoridae, which includes modern beavers, first appeared in North America in the late Eocene and colonized Eurasia via the Bering Land Bridge in the early Oligocene. Late in the Eocene, hystricognaths invaded Africa, most probably having originated in Asia at least 39.5 million years ago. From Africa, fossil evidence shows that some hystricognaths (caviomorphs) colonized South America, which was an isolated continent at the time, evidently making use of ocean currents to cross the Atlantic on floating debris. Caviomorphs had arrived in South America by 41 million years ago (implying a date at least as early as this for hystricognaths in Africa) and reached the Greater Antilles by the early Oligocene.

By 20 million years ago, fossils recognizably belonging to the current families, such as Muridae, could be found. Muroids may have originated in Eurasia and recolonized it up to ten more times. There is also evidence for up to seven colonizations of Africa, five of North America, four of Southeast Asia, and two of South America. Nesomyid rodents are thought to have rafted from Africa to Madagascar 20–24 million years ago. Some fossil rodents were very large in comparison to modern species; the largest known rodent was Josephoartigasia monesi, a pacarana that may have reached a length of 3 m (10 ft) and weight of 1,000 kg (2,200 lb). This animal lived 4–2 mya.
Although marsupials are the most prominent mammals in Australia, many rodents, all belonging to Muridae, are among the continent's mammal species. Fossil evidence suggests that rodents inhabited Australia as early as 4.5 million years ago. Species include the Hydromyini, 'old endemics', the first wave of rodents to colonize the country in the Miocene and early Pliocene, and the true rat (Rattus), 'new endemics', arriving in a subsequent wave in the late Pliocene or early Pleistocene. Molecular evidence supports one origin for 'old endemic' rodents in both Australia and New Guinea.
Rodents participated in the Great American Interchange that resulted from the joining of the Americas by the formation of the Isthmus of Panama, around 5 million years ago in the Piacenzian age. In this exchange, a small number of species such as the New World porcupines (Erethizontidae) headed north while murids migrated south. However, the main southward invasion of sigmodontines preceded the formation of the land bridge by at least several million years, probably occurring via rafting. Sigmodontines diversified explosively once in South America, although some degree of diversification may have already occurred in Central America before the colonization.
Classification
The use of the order name "Rodentia" is attributed to the English traveler and naturalist Thomas Edward Bowdich (1821). The Modern Latin word Rodentia is derived from rōdēns, present participle of rōdere, rōdō 'to gnaw, eat away'. The phylogeny of the rodents places them with the hares, rabbits, and pikas (order Lagomorpha) in the clades Glires, in Euarchontoglires and Boreoeutheria. Lagomorphs share with rodents continuously growing incisors. However, they have an additional pair of incisors in the upper jaw. The cladogram below shows some of the inner and outer relations of Rodentia based on a 2012 attempt by Wu et al. to align the molecular clock with paleontological data:

The living rodent families (and a few illustrative genera) based on the study done by Fabre et al. 2012.

The order Rodentia may be divided into suborders, infraorders, superfamilies, and families. There is a great deal of parallelism and convergence among rodents caused by the fact that they have tended to evolve to fill largely similar niches. This parallel evolution includes not only the structure of the teeth but also the infraorbital region of the skull (below the eye socket) and makes classification difficult as similar traits may not be due to common ancestry. Brandt (1855) was the first to propose dividing Rodentia into three suborders, Sciuromorpha, Hystricomorpha, and Myomorpha, based on the development of certain muscles in the jaw, and this system was widely accepted. Schlosser (1884) performed a comprehensive review of rodent fossils, mainly using the cheek teeth, and found that they fit into the classical system, but Tullborg (1899) proposed just two sub-orders, Sciurognathi and Hystricognathi. These were based on the degree of inflection of the lower jaw and were to be further subdivided into Sciuromorpha, Myomorpha, Hystricomorpha, and Bathyergomorpha. Matthew (1910) created a phylogenetic tree of New World rodents but did not include the more problematic Old World species. Further attempts at classification continued without agreement, with some authors adopting the classical three-suborder system and others Tullborg's two suborders.
These disagreements remain unresolved, nor have molecular studies fully resolved the situation, though they have confirmed the monophyly of the group and that the clade has descended from a common Paleocene ancestor. Carleton and Musser (2005) in Mammal Species of the World have provisionally adopted a five-suborder system: Sciuromorpha, Castorimorpha, Myomorpha, Anomaluromorpha, and Hystricomorpha. As of 2021, the American Society of Mammalogists recognizes 34 recent families containing more than 481 genera and 2277 species.
Conservation
While threats to the order are not particularly severe, 168 species of rodent in 126 genera are said to warrant conservation attention in the face of limited value placed by the public. Since 76 percent of rodent genera contain only one species, much phylogenetic diversity could be lost with a comparatively small number of extinctions. In the absence of more detailed knowledge of species at risk and accurate taxonomy, conservation focuses mainly on protecting higher taxa (such as families rather than species) and geographical hot spots. Several species of rice rat have become extinct since the 19th century, probably through habitat loss and invasive species. The brown hairy dwarf porcupine and red-crested tree-rat are considered vulnerable due to being recorded in a few localities, the former having not been documented since 1925 and the latter recorded only in its type locality on the Caribbean coast. The IUCN Species Survival Commission writes, "We can safely conclude that many South American rodents are seriously threatened, mainly by environmental disturbance and intensive hunting."
The "three now cosmopolitan commensal rodent pest species" (the brown rat, the black rat, and the house mouse) have been dispersed in association with humans, partly on sailing ships in the Age of Exploration, and with a fourth species in the Pacific, the Polynesian rat (Rattus exulans), have severely damaged island biotas around the world. The black rat in particular caused the extinction of over 40 percent of the terrestrial bird species on Lord Howe Island just ten years after its arrival in 1918. They were similarly destructive on Midway Island (1943) and Big South Cape Island (1962). Conservation projects can, with careful planning, completely eradicate these pest rodents from islands using an anticoagulant rodenticide such as brodifacoum. This approach has been successful on the island of Lundy in the United Kingdom, where the killing of an estimated 40,000 brown rats is giving populations of Manx shearwater and Atlantic puffin a chance to recover from near-extinction.
Rodents have also been susceptible to climate change, especially species living on low-lying islands. The Bramble Cay melomys, which lived on a small island or cay in the Great Barrier Reef, was the first mammal species to be declared extinct as a consequence of human-caused climate change.
Interaction with humansExploitationFur
Humans globally have used rodent fur for clothing. The native people of North America made much use of beaver pelts, tanning and sewing them together to make robes. Europeans appreciated the quality of these, and the North American fur trade developed and became of prime importance to early settlers. In Europe, the soft underfur known as "beaver wool" was found to be ideal for felting and was used to make beaver hats and trimming for clothing. Later, the coypu took over as a cheaper source of fur for felting. The chinchilla has a soft coat, and demand for its fur was so high that it was nearly wiped out in the wild before farming became the main source of pelts. Porcupine quills are used in traditional decorative clothing, such as Native American headdresses. Lakota women would harvest the quills for quillwork by throwing a blanket over a porcupine and retrieving the quills it left stuck in the blanket. The main quills may be dyed and then tied to a hide or birch bark with tendons.
Consumption
Humans have eaten at least 89 species of rodent, such as guinea pigs, agoutis, and capybaras; in 1985, rats were consumed by at least 42 different societies. Guinea pigs were first raised for food around 2500 B.C., and by 1500 B.C., they had become the main source of meat for the Inca Empire. In Peru, guinea pigs are valued as a source of protein, with around 64 million pieces of meat produced from 20 million domestic guinea pigs annually. Dormice were farmed in ancient Rome, either in special pots called "gliraria" or in large outdoor enclosures, where they were fattened on walnuts, chestnuts, and acorns. Africans have similarly raised Gambian pouched rats and cane rats. Researchers found that in Amazonia, the annual game weight taken by indigenous people consisted of as much as 40 percent pacas and common agoutis where larger mammals were scarce. In the United States, the most commonly consumed rodent species are squirrels, but also include muskrats, porcupines, and groundhogs. Mud-baked prairie dogs were a food source for the Navajo people, while gophers, squirrels, and rats were eaten by the Paiute.
Animal testing
Rodents are widely used in animal testing. Albino mutant rats were first used for research in 1828 and later became the first animal domesticated for purely scientific purposes. Nowadays, the house mouse is the most commonly used laboratory rodent, and in 1979, it was estimated that fifty million were used annually worldwide. They are favored because of their small size, quick reproduction, and ease of handling and because they share many of the same conditions and infections as humans. They are used in research into genetics, developmental biology, cell biology, oncology, and immunology. Guinea pigs have been extensively used in scientific research as early as the 17th century. They have been used to study infectious diseases, being vulnerable to such pathogens and having a human-like immune system. They played important roles in the discovery of Mycobacterium tuberculosis as the cause of tuberculosis in 1882, while studies of their immune system first demonstrated an adaptive immunity against yellow fever. The animals were also the site of the discovery in 1907 of vitamin C which, like humans, they cannot produce on their own. In 2014, it was reported that "[c]omparatively fewer guinea pigs are used in research today, but the species is still commonly used in studies of the respiratory and hearing systems." They have been launched into orbital space flight several times—first by the USSR on the Sputnik 9 biosatellite of 9 March 1961, with a successful recovery. The naked mole-rat is of interest to biomedical research due to its long lifespan, high pain tolerance, and near immunity to cancer.
Rodents have sensitive olfactory abilities, which have been used by humans to detect odors or chemicals of interest. The Gambian pouched rat can detect tuberculosis bacilli with a sensitivity of up to 86.6% and determine their absence with an accuracy of 93%. The same species has also been trained to detect land mines. Rats have been studied for their potential use in hazardous situations, such as disaster zones. They can be trained to respond to commands, which may be given remotely, and even persuaded to venture into brighter or more open areas, contrary to their normal behavior.
As pets
Some rodent species are kept as pets, particularly rats, mice, hamsters, gerbils, guinea pigs, and chinchillas. They are attractive due to their appearance, intelligence, friendliness, and minimal odor. Conversely, their small size and space requirement, low maintenance cost, and easy purchase have also made them disposable, though this has changed in the 21st century as more pet rodents have been taken to veterinary clinics. Different species have particular needs; hamsters require more water, while guinea pigs must have dietary vitamin C. The size of pet rodents also makes them vulnerable to injury by poor handling.
As pests and disease vectors
Some rodent species are serious agricultural pests, eating large quantities of food stored by humans. For example, in 2003 the amount of crops lost to rats in Asia was estimated to have been enough to feed 200 million people. Most of the damage worldwide is caused by a relatively small number of species, chiefly rats and mice. In Indonesia and Tanzania, rodents reduce crop yields by around fifteen percent, while in South America, losses have reached ninety percent. Across Africa, rodents including Mastomys and Arvicanthis damage cereals, groundnuts, vegetables, and cacao. In Asia, rats, mice, and species such as Microtus brandti, Meriones unguiculatus, and Eospalax baileyi damage crops of rice, sorghum, tubers, vegetables, and nuts. In Europe, as well as rats and mice, species of Apodemus, Microtus and, in occasional outbreaks, Arvicola terrestris cause damage to orchards, vegetables, and pasture as well as cereals. In South America, a wider range of rodent species, such as Holochilus, Akodon, Calomys, Oligoryzomys, Phyllotis, Sigmodon, and Zygodontomys, damage many crops, including sugarcane, fruits, vegetables, and tubers.
Rodents are also significant vectors of disease. The black rat, with the fleas that it carries, plays a primary role in spreading the bacterium Yersinia pestis, responsible for bubonic plague, and carries the organisms responsible for typhus, Weil's disease, toxoplasmosis, and trichinosis. A number of rodents carry hantaviruses, including the Puumala, Dobrava, and Saaremaa viruses, which can infect humans. Rodents also help to transmit diseases, including babesiosis, cutaneous leishmaniasis, human granulocytic anaplasmosis, Lyme disease, Omsk hemorrhagic fever, Powassan virus, rickettsialpox, relapsing fever, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and West Nile virus.

Because rodents are a nuisance and endanger public health, human societies often attempt to control them. Traditionally, this involved poisoning and trapping, methods that were not always safe or effective. More recently, integrated pest management attempts to improve control with a combination of surveys to determine the size and distribution of the pest population, the establishment of tolerance limits (levels of pest activity at which to intervene), interventions, and evaluation of effectiveness based on repeated surveys. Interventions may include education, making and applying laws and regulations, modifying the habitat, changing farming practices, and biological control, as well as poisoning and trapping. The use of pathogens such as Salmonella has the drawback that they can infect humans and domestic animals, and rodents often become resistant. Domestic and feral cats are able to control rodents effectively, provided the rodent population is not too large. The use of other predators, including ferrets, mongooses, and monitor lizards, had "unsatisfactory" results.


Calippus is an extinct genus of hoofed mammals in the horse family (Equidae), known from the Middle Miocene through the Early Pliocene of North and Central America. Fossils have been found in the Central United States and the Eastern United States, ranging south to Honduras. These equines had high crowned teeth and a quadrangular, wide muzzle, and were small compared to their contemporary relatives, with C. elachistus weighing 49 kg, C. cerasinus weighing 102 kg, 132 kg for C. theristes and 73 kg for C. mccartyi.


Pelycosaur ( PEL-ih-kə-sor) is an older term for basal or primitive Late Paleozoic synapsids, excluding the therapsids and their descendants. Previously, the term mammal-like reptile was used, and Pelycosauria was considered an order, but this is now thought to be incorrect and outdated. The terms stem mammals, protomammals, and basal or primitive synapsids are instead used where needed.
Because Pelycosaur excludes its own descendants, the advanced synapsid group Therapsida, the term is paraphyletic and contrary to modern formal naming practice. Thus the name pelycosaurs, similar to the term mammal-like reptiles, fell out of favor among scientists by the 21st century, and is only used informally, if at all, in the modern scientific literature.
Etymology
The modern word was created from Greek pélyx meaning 'basin' and saûros meaning 'lizard'. The term pelycosaur has been fairly well abandoned by paleontologists because it no longer matches the features that distinguish a clade.
In phylogenetic nomenclature, "Pelycosauria" is not used formally, since it does not constitute a group of all organisms descended from some common ancestor (a clade), specifically excluding therapsids, which are descended from pelycosaurs. Instead, it represents a paraphyletic "grade" of basal synapsids leading up to the clade Therapsida.
Eupelycosauria is used as a proper monophyletic group to designate the clade that includes most pelycosaurs, along with the Therapsida and Mammalia. Caseasauria a pelycosaur side-branch, or clade, that did not leave any descendants.
Evolutionary history
The pelycosaurs appear to have been a group of synapsids that have direct ancestral links with the mammals, having differentiated teeth and a developing hard palate. The pelycosaurs appeared during the Late Carboniferous and reached their apex in the early part of the Permian, remaining the dominant land animals for some 40 million years. A few continued into the Capitanian, but they experienced a sharp decline in diversity in the late Kungurian. They were succeeded by the therapsids.
Description
Some species were quite large, growing to a length of 3 metres (10 ft) or more, although most species were much smaller. Well-known pelycosaurs include the genera Dimetrodon, Sphenacodon, Edaphosaurus, and Ophiacodon.
Pelycosaur fossils have been found mainly in Europe and North America, although some small, late-surviving forms are known from Russia and South Africa.
Unlike lepidosaurian reptiles, pelycosaurs might have lacked reptilian epidermal scales. Fossil evidence from some varanopids shows that parts of the skin were covered in rows of osteoderms, presumably overlain by horny scutes. The belly was covered in rectangular scutes, looking like those present in crocodiles.
Parts of the skin not covered in scutes might have had naked, glandular skin like that found in some mammals. Dermal scutes are also found in a diverse number of extant mammals with conservative body types, such as in the tails of some rodents, sengis, moonrats, the opossums, and other marsupials, and as regular dermal armour with underlying bone in the armadillo.
At least two pelycosaur clades independently evolved a tall sail, consisting of elongated vertebral spines: the edaphosaurids and the sphenacodontids. In life, this may have been covered by skin, and likely functioned as a thermoregulatory device or as a mating display.
Taxonomy
In traditional classification, the order Pelycosauria is paraphyletic in that the therapsids (the "higher" synapsids) have emerged from them. That means Pelycosauria is a grouping of animals that does not contain all descendants of its common ancestor, as is often required by phylogenetic nomenclature. In evolutionary taxonomy, Therapsida is a separated order from Pelycosauria, and mammals (having evolved from therapsids) are separated from both as their own class. This use has not been recommended by a majority of systematists since the 1990s, but several paleontologists nevertheless continue using this word.
In 1940, the group was reviewed in detail, and every species known at the time described, with many illustrated, in an important monograph by Alfred Sherwood Romer and Llewellyn Price. The following classification was presented by Benton in 2004.

Order Pelycosauria*
Suborder Caseasauria
Family Eothyrididae
Family Caseidae
Suborder Eupelycosauria
Family Varanopidae
Family Ophiacodontidae
Family Edaphosauridae
Infraorder Sphenacodontia
Family Sphenacodontidae
Order Therapsida


Pinnipeds (pronounced ), commonly known as seals, are a widely distributed and diverse clade of carnivorous, fin-footed, semiaquatic, mostly marine mammals. They comprise the extant families Odobenidae (whose only living member is the walrus), Otariidae (the eared seals: sea lions and fur seals), and Phocidae (the earless seals, or true seals), with 34 extant species and more than 50 extinct species described from fossils. While seals were historically thought to have descended from two ancestral lines, molecular evidence supports them as a monophyletic group (descended from one ancestor). Pinnipeds belong to the suborder Caniformia of the order Carnivora; their closest living relatives are musteloids (weasels, raccoons, skunks and red pandas), having diverged about 50 million years ago.
Seals range in size from the 1 m (3 ft 3 in) and 45 kg (100 lb) Baikal seal to the 5 m (16 ft) and 3,200 kg (7,100 lb) southern elephant seal. Several species exhibit sexual dimorphism. They have streamlined bodies and four limbs that are modified into flippers. Though not as fast in the water as dolphins, seals are more flexible and agile. Otariids primarily use their front limbs to propel themselves through the water, while phocids and walruses primarily use their hind limbs for this purpose. Otariids and walruses have hind limbs that can be pulled under the body and used as legs on land. By comparison, terrestrial locomotion by phocids is more cumbersome. Otariids have visible external ears, while phocids and walruses lack these. Pinnipeds have well-developed senses—their eyesight and hearing are adapted for both air and water, and they have an advanced tactile system in their whiskers or vibrissae. Some species are well adapted for diving to great depths. They have a layer of fat, or blubber, under the skin to keep warm in cold water, and, other than the walrus, all species are covered in fur.
Although pinnipeds are widespread, most species prefer the colder waters of the Northern and Southern Hemispheres. They spend most of their lives in water, but come ashore to mate, give birth, molt or to avoid ocean predators, such as sharks and orcas. Seals mainly live in marine environments but can also be found in fresh water. They feed largely on fish and marine invertebrates; a few, such as the leopard seal, feed on large vertebrates, such as penguins and other seals. Walruses are specialized for feeding on bottom-dwelling mollusks. Male pinnipeds typically mate with more than one female (polygyny), though the degree of polygyny varies with the species. The males of land-breeding species tend to mate with a greater number of females than those of ice breeding species. Male pinniped strategies for reproductive success vary between defending females, defending territories that attract females and performing ritual displays or lek mating. Pups are typically born in the spring and summer months and females bear almost all the responsibility for raising them. Mothers of some species fast and nurse their young for a relatively short period of time while others take foraging trips at sea between nursing bouts. Walruses are known to nurse their young while at sea. Seals produce a number of vocalizations, notably the barks of California sea lions, the gong-like calls of walruses and the complex songs of Weddell seals.
The meat, blubber and skin of pinnipeds have traditionally been used by indigenous peoples of the Arctic. Seals have been depicted in various cultures worldwide. They are commonly kept in captivity and are even sometimes trained to perform tricks and tasks. Once relentlessly hunted by commercial industries for their products, seals are now protected by international law. The Japanese sea lion and the Caribbean monk seal have become extinct in the past century, while the Mediterranean monk seal and Hawaiian monk seal are ranked as endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature. Besides hunting, pinnipeds also face threats from accidental trapping, marine pollution, climate change and conflicts with local people.
Etymology
The name "pinniped" derives from the Latin words pinna 'fin' and pes, pedis 'foot'. The common name "seal" originates from the Old English word seolh, which is in turn derived from the Proto-Germanic *selkhaz.
Taxonomy
The German naturalist Johann Karl Wilhelm Illiger was the first to recognize the pinnipeds as a distinct taxonomic unit; in 1811 he gave the name Pinnipedia to both a family and an order. American zoologist Joel Asaph Allen reviewed the world's pinnipeds in an 1880 monograph, History of North American pinnipeds, a monograph of the walruses, sea-lions, sea-bears and seals of North America. In this publication, he traced the history of names, gave keys to families and genera, described North American species and provided synopses of species in other parts of the world. In 1989, Annalisa Berta and colleagues proposed the unranked clade Pinnipedimorpha to contain the fossil genus Enaliarctos and modern seals as a sister group. Pinnipeds belong to the order Carnivora and the suborder Caniformia (known as dog-like carnivorans). Of the three extant families, the Otariidae and Odobenidae are grouped in the superfamily Otarioidea, while the Phocidae belong to the superfamily Phocoidea. There are 34 extant species of pinnipeds, and more than 50 fossil species of pinnipedimorphs.
Otariids are also known as eared seals due to their pinnae. These animals swim mainly using their well-developed fore-flippers. They can also "walk" on land by shifting their hind-flippers forward under the body. The front end of an otariid's frontal bone protrudes between the nasal bones, with a large and flattened supraorbital foramen. An extra spine splits the supraspinatous fossa and bronchi that are divided in the front. Otariids consist of two types: sea lions and fur seals; the latter typically being smaller, with pointier snouts, longer fore-flippers and heavier fur coats. Five genera and seven species (one now extinct) of sea lion are known to exist, while two genera and nine species of fur seal exist. While sea lions and fur seals have historically been considered separate subfamilies (Otariinae and Arctocephalinae respectively), genetic and molecular evidence has refuted this, indicating that the northern fur seal is basal to other otariids and the Australian sea lion and New Zealand sea lion are more closely related to Arctocephalus than to other sea lions.
Odobenidae has only one living member: the walrus. This animal is noticeable from its larger size (exceeded only by the elephant seals), nearly hairless skin, flattened snout and long upper canines, known as tusks. Like otariids, walruses can walk on land with their hind limbs. When moving in water, the walrus relies on its hind limbs for locomotion, while its forelimbs are used for steering. Also, it has no outer ears. The epipterygoid of the jaw is well developed and the back of the nasal bones are horizontal. In the feet, the calcaneuses protrude in the middle.
Phocids are known as true or "earless" seals. These animals lack outer ears and cannot position their hind-flippers to move on land, making them more cumbersome. This is because of their massive ankle bones and flatter heels. In water, true seals rely on the side-to-side motion of their hind-flippers and lower body to move forward. The phocid's skull has thickened mastoids, puffed up entotympanic bones, nasal bones with a pointed tip in the back and a non-existent supraorbital foramen. The hip has a more converse ilium. A 2006 molecular study supports the division of phocids into two monophyletic subfamilies: Monachinae, which consists of elephant seals, monk seals and Antarctic seals; and Phocinae, which consists of all the rest.
Evolution
One popular hypothesis suggested that pinnipeds are diphyletic (descended from two ancestral lines), with walruses and otariids sharing a recent common ancestor with bears; and phocids sharing one with Musteloidea. However, morphological and molecular evidence support a monophyletic origin. A 2021 genetic study found that pinnipeds are more closely related to musteloids. Pinnipeds split from other caniforms 50 million years ago (mya) during the Eocene. The earliest fossils of pinnipeds date back to the Late Oligocene. Fossil animals representing basal lineages include Puijila, of the Early Miocene in Arctic Canada. It resembled a modern otter, but shows evidence of quadrupedal swimming—retaining a form of aquatic locomotion that led to those employed by modern pinnipeds. Potamotherium, which lived in the same period in Europe, was similar to Puijila but more aquatic. The braincase of Potamotherium shows evidence that it used its whiskers to hunt, like modern seals. Both Puijila and Potamotherium fossils have been found in lake deposits, suggesting that seal ancestors were originally adapted for fresh water.

Enaliarctos, a fossil species of late Oligocene/early Miocene (24–22 mya) California, closely resembled modern pinnipeds; it was adapted to an aquatic life with flippers and a flexible spine. Its teeth were more like land predators in that they were more adapted for shearing. Its hind-flippers may have allowed it to walk on land, and it probably did not leave coastal areas as much as its modern relatives. Enaliarctos was likely more of a fore-flipper swimmer, but could probably swim with either pair. One species, Enaliarctos emlongi, exhibited notable sexual dimorphism, suggesting that this physical characteristic may have been an important driver of pinniped evolution. A closer relative of extant pinnipeds was Pteronarctos, which lived in Oregon 19–15 mya. As in modern seals, the maxilla or upper jaw bone of Pteroarctos intersects with the orbital wall. The extinct family Desmatophocidae lived 23–10 mya in the North Pacific. They had long skulls that with large orbits, interlocked zygomatic bones and rounded molars and premolars. They also were sexually dimorphic and may have been capable of swimming with both or either pair of flippers. They are grouped with modern pinnipeds, but there is debate as to whether they are more closely related to phocids or to otariids and walruses. A 2024 study places them within Phocidae, specifically Phocinae.

The ancestors of the Otarioidea and Phocoidea diverged around 25 mya. Phocids are known to have existed for at least 15 million years, and molecular evidence supports a divergence of the Monachinae and Phocinae lineages around this time. The fossil genera Monotherium and Leptophoca of southeastern North America represent the earliest members of Monachinae and Phocinae respectively. Both lineages may have originated in the North Atlantic, and likely reached the Pacific via the Central American Seaway. Phocines mainly stayed in the Northern Hemisphere, while the monachines diversified southward. The lineages of Otariidae and Odobenidae split around 20 mya. The earliest fossil records of otariids are in North Pacific and dated to around 11 mya. Early fossil genera include Pithanotaria and Thalassoleon. The Callorhinus lineage split the earliest, followed by the Eumetopias/Zalophus lineage and then the rest, which colonized the Southern Hemisphere. The earliest fossils of Odobenidae—Prototaria of Japan and Proneotherium of Oregon—date to 18–16 mya. These primitive walruses had normal sized canines and fed on fish instead of mollusks. Later taxa like Gomphotaria, Pontolis and Dusignathus had longer canines on both the upper and lower jaw. The familiar long upper tusks developed in the genera Valenictus and Odobenus. The lineage of the modern walrus may have spread from the North Pacific to the North Atlantic through the Caribbean and Central American Seaway 8–5 mya, and then back to the North Pacific via the Arctic 1 mya, or to the Arctic and subsequently the North Atlantic during the Pleistocene.
Anatomy and physiology
Pinnipeds have streamlined, spindle-shaped bodies with small or non-existent ear flaps, rounded heads, short muzzles, flexible necks, limbs modified into flippers and small tails. The mammary glands and genitals can withdraw into the body. Seals are unique among carnivorans in that their orbital walls are mostly shaped by the maxilla and are not contained by certain facial bones. Compared to land carnivores, pinnipeds have fewer teeth, which are pointed and cone-shaped. They are adapted for holding onto slippery prey rather than shearing meat like the carnassials of other carnivorans. The walrus has unique tusks which are long upper canines.
Pinnipeds range in size from the 1 m (3 ft 3 in) and 45 kg (100 lb) Baikal seal to the 5 m (16 ft) and 3,200 kg (7,100 lb) southern elephant seal. Overall, they tend to be larger than other carnivores. Several species have male-biased sexual dimorphism that depends on how polygynous a species is: highly polygynous species like elephant seals are extremely sexually dimorphic, while less polygynous species have males and females that are closer in size, or, in the case of Antarctic seals, females are moderately bigger. Males of sexually dimorphic species also tend to have secondary sex characteristics, such as larger or more prominent heads, necks, chests, crests, noses/proboscises and canine teeth as well as thicker fur and manes. Though more polygynous species tend to be sexually dimorphic, some evidence suggests that size differences between the sexes originated due to ecological differences, with polygyny developing later.

Almost all pinnipeds have fur coats, the exception being the walrus, which is only sparsely covered. Even some fully furred species (particularly sea lions) are less furry than land mammals. Fur seals have lush coats consisting of an undercoat and guard hairs. In species that live on ice, young pups have thicker coats than adults. The individual hairs on the coat, known collectively as lanugo, can trap heat from sunlight and keep the pup warm. Pinnipeds are typically countershaded, and are darker colored dorsally and lighter colored ventrally, which serves to counter the effects of self-shadowing caused by light shining over the ocean water. The pure white fur of harp seal pups conceals them in their Arctic environment. Several species have clashing patterns of light and dark pigmentation. All fully furred species molt; the process of which may be quick or gradual depending on the species. Seals have a layer of subcutaneous fat, known as blubber, that is particularly thick in phocids and walruses. Blubber serves both to keep the animals warm and to provide energy and nourishment when they are fasting. It can constitute as much as 50% of a pinniped's mass. Newborn pups have a thin layer of blubber, but some species compensate for this with thick lanugos.
The simple stomach of pinnipeds is typical of carnivores. Most species have neither a cecum nor a clear demarcation between the small and large intestines; the large intestine is comparatively short and only slightly wider than the small intestine. Small intestine lengths range from 8 times (California sea lion) to 25 times (elephant seal) the body length. The length of the intestine may be an adaptation to frequent deep diving, allowing for more room in the digestive tract for partially digested food. An appendix is absent in seals. As in most marine mammals, the kidneys are divided into lobes and filter out excess salt.
Locomotion
Pinnipeds have two pairs of flippers on the front and back, the fore-flippers and hind-flippers. Their elbows and ankles are not externally visible. Pinnipeds are not as fast as cetaceans, typically swimming at 5–15 kn (9–28 km/h; 6–17 mph) compared to around 20 kn (37 km/h; 23 mph) for several species of dolphin. Seals are more agile and flexible, and some otariids, such as the California sea lion, can make dorsal turns as the back of their heads can touch their hind flippers. Pinnipeds have several adaptions for reducing drag. In addition to their streamlined bodies, they have smooth networks of muscle bundles in their skin that may increase laminar flow and cut through the water. The hair erector muscles are absent, so their fur can be streamlined as they swim.
When swimming, otariids rely on their fore-flippers for locomotion in a wing-like manner similar to penguins and sea turtles. Fore-flipper movement is not continuous, and the animal glides between each stroke. Compared to terrestrial carnivorans, the fore-limb bones of otariids are reduced in length, giving them less resistance at the elbow joint as the flippers flap; the hind-flippers maneuver them. Phocids and walruses swim by moving their hind-flippers and lower body from side to side, while their fore-flippers are mainly used for maneuvering. Some species leap out of the water, and "ride" waves.
Pinnipeds can move around on land, though not as well as terrestrial animals. Otariids and walruses are capable of turning their hind-flippers forward and under the body so they can "walk" on all fours. The fore-flippers move along a transverse plane, rather than the sagittal plane like the limbs of land mammals. Otariids create momentum by laterally swaying their heads and necks. Sea lions have been recorded climbing up flights of stairs. Phocids lack the ability to walk on their hind-flippers, and must flop and wriggle their bodies forward as their fore-flippers keep them stable. In some species, the fore-flippers may act like oars pushing against the ground. Phocids can move faster on ice, as they are able to slide.
Senses
The eyes of pinnipeds are relatively large for their size and are positioned near the front of the head. Only the smaller eyes of the walruses are located on each side of the head; since they forage at the bottom for sedentary mollusks. A seal's eye is suited for seeing both underwater and in air. Most of the retina is equidistant around the spherical lens. The cornea has a flattened center where refraction does not change between air and water. The vascular iris has a strong dilator muscle. A contracted pupil is typically pear-shaped, although the bearded seal's is more horizontal. Compared to deep-diving elephant seals, the iris of shallower species, such as harbor seals and California sea lions, does not change much in size between constriction and dilation. Seals are able to see in relative darkness with a tapetum lucidum, a reflecting layer that increases sensitivity by reflecting light back through the rods.

On land, pinnipeds are near-sighted in dim light. This is reduced in bright light as the contracted pupil decreases the ability of the lens and the cornea to refract (bend) light. Polar living seals like the harp seal have corneas that can withstand the bright light that reflects off snow and ice, which would otherwise cause snow blindness. Color vision requires at least two types of visual pigments with different spectral sensitivities but since pinnipeds lack short-wavelength-sensitive cone cells, they are generally considered to be color-blind. Flexible eye movement has been documented in seals. The walrus can project its eyes out from its sockets in both a forward and upward direction due to its advanced extraocular muscles and absence of an orbital roof. The seal eye is durable as the corneal epithelium is hardened by keratin, and the sclera is thick enough to withstand the pressures of diving. Seals also secrete mucus from the lacrimal gland to protect their eyes. As in many mammals and birds, pinnipeds possess nictitating membranes.
The pinniped ear is adapted for hearing underwater, where it can hear sound frequencies of up to 70,000 Hz. In air, hearing is somewhat reduced in pinnipeds compared to many terrestrial mammals. While their airborne hearing sensitivity is generally weaker than humans', they still have a wide frequency range. One study of three species—the harbor seal, California sea lion and northern elephant seal—found that the sea lion was best adapted for airborne hearing, the elephant seal for underwater hearing and the harbor seal was equally adapted for both. Although pinnipeds have a fairly good sense of smell on land, it is useless under water as their nostrils are closed.

The whiskers (vibrissae) are normally smooth in otariids and walruses, while those of most phocids are wavey. The whiskers of some otariids grow quite long—those of the Antarctic fur seal can reach 41 cm (16 in)– while walruses have the most vibrissae, at 600–700 individual hairs. Compared to terrestrial mammals, the vibrissae of pinnipeds have ten times more nerve connections, allowing them to effectively detect vibrations in the water. These vibrations are generated, for example, when a fish swims through water. Detecting vibrations is useful when the animals are foraging, and may add to or even replace vision, particularly in darkness.
Harbor seals can follow hydrodynamic paths made minutes earlier, similar to a dog following a scent trail, and can even discriminate the size and type of object responsible for the trail. Unlike terrestrial mammals, such as rodents, pinnipeds do not sweep their whiskers over an object when examining it, but can protract the hairs forward while holding them steady, maximizing their detection. The vibrissa's angle relative to the flow seems to be the most important contributor to detection ability. Whiskers may also play a role in navigation; spotted seals appear to use them to detect breathing holes in the ice.
Diving adaptations
To dive, a pinniped must first exhale much of the air out of its lungs and shut its nostrils and throat cartilages to protect the trachea. The airways are supported by cartilaginous rings and smooth muscle, and the chest muscles and alveoli can completely deflate during deeper dives. While land mammals generally cannot empty their lungs, pinnipeds can reinflate their lungs even after alveolar collapse. The middle ear contains sinuses that probably fill with blood during dives, preventing middle ear squeeze. The heart of a seal is moderately flattened to allow the lungs to deflate. The trachea is flexible enough to collapse under pressure. During deep dives, any remaining air in their lungs is shifted to the bronchioles and trachea, which stops gas exchange with the blood, and thereby prevents them from developing decompression sickness, oxygen toxicity and nitrogen narcosis. In addition, seals can tolerate large amounts of lactic acid, which reduces skeletal muscle fatigue during intense physical activity.
The circulatory system of pinnipeds is large and elaborate; retia mirabilia line the inside of the trunk and limbs, allowing for greater oxygen storage during diving. As with other diving mammals, pinnipeds have large amounts of hemoglobin and myoglobin stored in their blood and muscles respectively. This provides enough oxygen storage for them to stay submerged for long periods. Deep-diving species such as elephant seals have blood volumes that represent up to 20% of their body weight. When diving, they reduce their heart rate, and blood flow is mostly restricted to the heart, brain and lungs. Pinnipeds have bulb-shaped ascending aortas which are largest in deeper and longer diving species, allowing them to better maintain their blood pressure.
Thermoregulation
Pinnipeds keep warm by having large, thick bodies, insulating blubber and fur, and fast metabolism. Their idle body temperature is around 38 °C (100 °F) against the 0–5 °C (32–41 °F) ocean water. Metabolic rates of different species vary between 1.5 and 3 times that of land mammals. Also, the blood vessels in their flippers are adapted for countercurrent exchange; small veins surround arteries transporting blood from the body core, capturing heat from them. While blubber and fur keep the seal warm in water, they can also overheat the animal when it is on land. To counteract overheating, many species cool off by covering themselves in sand. Monk seals may even dig up the cooler layers. The northern fur seal cools off by panting.
Sleep
Pinnipeds spend many months at a time at sea, so they must sleep in the water. Scientists have recorded elephant seals sleeping for minutes at a time while slowly drifting downward in a belly-up orientation. Like other marine mammals, seals sleep in water with half of their brain awake so that they can detect and escape from predators, as well as surface for air without fully waking. When they are asleep on land, both sides of their brain go into sleep mode.
Distribution and habitat
Living pinnipeds are widespread in cold oceanic waters; particularly in the North Atlantic, the North Pacific and the Southern Ocean. By contrast, the consistently warm Indomalayan waters have no seals. Monk seals and some otariids live in tropical and subtropical waters. Seals usually require cool, nutrient-rich waters with temperatures lower than 20 °C (68 °F). Even in more tropical climates, lower temperatures and biological productivity may be provided by currents. Only monk seals live in waters that generally lack these features. The Caspian seal and Baikal seal are found in large landlocked bodies of water (the Caspian Sea and Lake Baikal respectively).
As a whole, pinnipeds can be found in a variety of aquatic habitats, mostly coastal water, but also open ocean, deep waters near offshore islands, brackish waters and even freshwater lakes and rivers. The Baikal seal is the only exclusively freshwater species. Pinnipeds also use a number of terrestrial habitats and substrates, both continental and island. In non-polar regions, they haul out on to rocky shores, sandy and pebble beaches, sandbanks, tidal flats or pools, and in sea caves. Some species also rest on man-made structures built along the coast or offshore. Pinnipeds may move further from the water using sand dunes or vegetation, or even rocky cliffs. New Zealand sea lions may travel to forests 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) from the ocean. In polar regions, seals haul out on to both fast ice and drift ice. Some even den underneath the ice, particularly in pressure ridges and crevasses.
Behavior and life history
Pinnipeds have an amphibious lifestyle; they are mostly aquatic, but haul out to breed, molt, rest, sun or to avoid aquatic predators. Several species are known to migrate over vast distances, particularly in response to environmental changes. Elephant seals are at sea for most of the year and there are vast distances between their breeding and molting sites. The northern elephant seal is one of farthest mammalian migraters, traveling 18,000–21,000 km (11,000–13,000 mi). Otariids tend to migrate less than phocids, especially tropical species. Traveling seals may reach their destination using geomagnetic fields, water and wind currents, solar and lunar positions and the temperature and chemical makeup of the water.
Pinnipeds may dive during foraging or to avoid predators. When foraging, for example, the Weddell seal typically dives for no more than 15 minutes and 400 m (1,300 ft) deep, but can dive for as long as 73 minutes and reach 600 m (2,000 ft) deep. Northern elephant seals often dive 350–650 m (1,100–2,100 ft) for as long as 20 minutes. They can also dive 1,500 m (4,900 ft) and for over an hour. The dives of otariids tend to be shorter and less deep. They typically last 5–7 minutes with average depths to 30–45 m (100–150 ft). However, the New Zealand sea lion has been recorded diving to a maximum of 460 m (1,510 ft) and have submerged for as long as 12 minutes. The diet of walruses does not require them to dive very deep or very long. Pinnipeds generally live 25–30 years.
Foraging and predation
All pinnipeds are carnivorous and predatory. As a whole, they mostly feed on fish and cephalopods, but also consume crustaceans, bivalves, zooplankton and endothermic (warm-blooded) prey like sea birds. While most species have generalist diets, a few are specialists. Examples are krill-eating crabeater seals, crustacean-eating ringed seals, squid specialists like the Ross seal and southern elephant seal, and the bearded seal and walrus, which specialize on benthic invertebrates.
Pinnipeds may hunt solitarily or cooperatively. The former behavior is typical when hunting non-schooling fish, immobile or sluggish invertebrates and endothermic prey. Solitary foraging species usually hunt in coastal or shallow water. An exception to this is the northern elephant seal, which hunts deep in the open ocean for fish. In addition, walruses feed solitarily but are often near other walruses in small or large groups. For large schools of fish or squid, pinnipeds such as certain otariids hunt cooperatively in large groups, locating and herding their prey. Some species, such as California and South American sea lions, will hunt alongside sea birds and cetaceans.
Seals typically swallow their food whole, and will rip apart prey that is too big. The leopard seal, a prolific predator of penguins, is known to violently shake its prey to death. Complex serrations in the teeth of filter-feeding species, such as crabeater seals, allow water to leak out as they swallow their planktonic food. The walrus is unique in that it consumes its prey by suction feeding, using its tongue to suck the meat of a bivalve out of the shell. While pinnipeds mostly hunt in the water, South American sea lions are known to chase down penguins on land. Some species may swallow stones or pebbles for reasons not understood. Though they can drink seawater, pinnipeds get most of their fluid intake from their food.

Pinnipeds themselves are subject to predation. Most species are preyed on by the orca. To subdue and kill seals, orcas strike them with their heads or tails—the latter causing them to fly in the air—or simply bite into them and rip them apart. They are typically hunted by groups of 10 or fewer whales, but they are occasionally hunted by larger groups or by lone individuals. All age classes may be targeted, but pups most of all. Large sharks are another major predator of pinnipeds—usually the great white shark but also the tiger shark and mako shark. Sharks usually attack by ambushing them from below. Injured seals that escape are usually able to recover from their wounds. Otariids that have been targeted in the hindquarters are more likely to survive, while phocids are more likely to survive with forequarters injures. Pinnipeds are also preyed on by terrestrial and pagophilic predators. The polar bear is a major predator of Arctic seals and walruses, particularly pups. Bears may seek out seals, or simply wait for them to come by. Other terrestrial predators include cougars, brown hyenas and various species of canids, which mostly target the young.

Pinnipeds lessen the chance of predation by gathering in groups. Some species are capable of inflicting damaging wounds on their attackers with their sharp canines; adult walruses are particularly risky prey for polar bears. Cape fur seals will even mob white sharks. When out at sea, northern elephant seals dive out of the reach of surface-hunting orcas and white sharks. In the Antarctic, which lacks terrestrial predators, pinniped species spend more time on the ice than their Arctic counterparts.
Interspecific predation among pinnipeds does occur. The leopard seal is known to prey on many other species, especially the crabeater seal. Leopard seals typically target crabeater pups, particularly from November to January. Older crabeater seals commonly bear scars from failed leopard seal attacks; a 1977 study found that 75% of a sample of 85 individual crabeaters had these scars. Walruses, despite being specialized for feeding on bottom-dwelling invertebrates, occasionally prey on Arctic seals. They kill their prey with their long tusks and eat their blubber and skin. Steller sea lions have been recorded eating harbor seals, northern fur seals and California sea lions, particularly pups and small adults. New Zealand sea lions feed on pups of some fur seal species, and the South American sea lion may prey on South American fur seals. In addition, cannibalism has been documented among various pinniped species.
Reproductive behavior
The mating system of pinnipeds varies from extreme polygyny to serial monogamy.  Species that breed on land are usually more polygynous, as females gather in large aggregations and males are able to mate with them as well as defend them from rivals. These species include elephant seals, grey seals and most otariids. Land-breeding pinnipeds prefer to mate on islands where there are fewer land predators. Suitable islands are in short supply and tend to be crowded. Since the land they breed on is fixed, females return to the same sites for many years. The males arrive earlier in the season and wait for them. The males stay on land to monopolize females; and may fast for months as they would lose their position if they went to feed at sea. Polygynous species also tend to be extremely sexual dimorphic in favor of males. This dimorphism manifests itself in larger chests and necks, longer canines and denser fur—all traits that equip males for combat. Larger males have more blubber and thus more energy reserves for fasting.
Other seals, like the walrus and most phocids, breed on ice and copulate in the water—a few land-breeding species also mate in water. Females of these species tend to be more spaced out and there is less site fidelity, since ice is less stable than solid land. Hence polygyny tends to be weaker in ice-breeding species. An exception to this is the walrus, whose distribution of food forces females closer together. Pinnipeds that breed on fast ice tend to cluster together more than those that breed on drift ice. Seals that breed on ice tend to have little or no sexual dimorphism. In Antarctic seals, there is some size bias in favor of females. Walruses and hooded seals are unique among ice-breeding species in that they have pronounced sexual dimorphism in favor of males.

Adult male pinnipeds have several strategies to ensure reproductive success. Otariid males gain access to females by establishing territories where females can bask and give birth and contain valuable resources such as shade, tide pools or access to water. Territories are usually marked by natural barriers, and some may be fully or partially underwater. Males defend their territorial boundaries with threatening vocalizations and postures, but physical fights are usually not very violent, and are mostly limited to early in the season. Individuals also return to the same territorial site each breeding season. In certain species, like the Steller sea lion and northern fur seal, a dominant male can maintain a territory for as long as 2–3 months. Females can usually move freely between territories and males are unable to coerce females who are intent on leaving, but in some species such as the northern fur seal, South American sea lion and Australian sea lion, males keep females in their territories with threatening displays and even violence. In some phocid species, like the harbor seal, Weddell seal and bearded seal, the males establish "maritories" and patrol and defend the waters bordering female haul-out areas, waiting for a female to enter. These are also maintained by vocalizations. The maritories of Weddell seal males include entries to female breathing holes in the ice.

Lek systems are known to exist among some populations of walruses. These males gather near female herds and try to attract them with elaborate courtship displays and vocalizations. Lekking may also exist among California sea lions, South American fur seals, New Zealand sea lions and harbor seals. In some species, including elephant seals, grey seals and non-lekking walruses, males will try to lay claim to the desired females and defend them from rivals. Elephant seal males, in particular, establish dominance hierarchies via displays and fights, with the highest ranking males having a near monopoly on reproductive success. An alpha male can have a harem of 100 females. Grey seal males usually place themselves among a cluster of females whose members may change over time, while males of some walrus populations guard female herds. Male ringed, crabeater, spotted and hooded seals follow and defend nearby females and mate with them when they reach estrus. These may be lone females or small groups. South American sea lions are considered to be both a territory-defending and female-defending species, with males laying claim to both territories and individual pre-estrus females.
Younger or subdominant male pinnipeds may attempt to achieve reproductive success in other ways including sneakiness, harassment of departing females or even group raids. Female pinnipeds do appear to have some choice in mates, particularly in lek-breeding species like the walrus, but also in elephant seals where the males try to dominate all the females that they want to mate with. When a female elephant seal or grey seal is mounted by an unwanted male, she tries to resist and get away. This commotion attracts other males to the scene, and the most dominant will take over and mate with female himself. Dominant female elephant seals stay in the center of the colony where they are in the domain of a more dominant male, while marginal females are left with subordinates. Female Steller sea lions may solicit their territorial males for mating.
Birth and parenting
Otariids enter estrus shortly after giving birth, while phocids can mate again during late lactation or when their young are weaned and walruses have five- to six-year gaps between births. All species have delayed implantation, in which the embryo does not enter the uterus for weeks or months. Delayed implantation allows the female to wait until conditions are right for birthing. Gestation in seals (including delayed implantation) typically lasts a year. For most species, birthing takes place in spring and summer. Usually, single pups are born; twins are rare and have high mortality rates. Pups of most species are born relatively developed and precocial.
Pinniped milk has "little to no lactose". Mother pinnipeds have different strategies for maternal care and lactation. Phocids such as elephant seals, grey seals and hooded seals have a lactation period that lasts days or weeks, during which they fast and nurse their pups on land or ice. The milk of these species consists of up to 60% fat, allowing the young to grow quickly. Each day until they are weaned, northern elephant seal pups gain 4 kg (9 lb). Some pups gain weight more quickly than others by stealing extra milk from other mothers. Alloparenting occurs in these fasting species; while most northern elephant seal mothers nurse their own pups and reject nursings from alien pups, some do accept alien pups with their own.

For otariids and some phocids like the harbor seal, mothers fast and nurse their pups for a few days at a time. In between nursing bouts, the females forage at sea while the young stay behind onshore. If there is enough food close to shore, a female can be gone for as little as a day, but otherwise may be at sea for as long as three weeks. Lactation in otariids may last 6–11 months; in the Galápagos fur seal it can last up to three years. Pups of these species are weaned at heavier weights than their phocid counterparts, but the latter grow quicker. Walruses are unique in that mothers nurse their young at sea. Young pinnipeds typically start swimming on their own and some species can even swim as newborns. Young may wait days or weeks before entering the water; elephant seals start swimming weeks after weaning.
Male pinnipeds generally play little role in raising the young. Male walruses may help inexperienced young as they learn to swim, and have even been recorded caring for orphans. When a group is threatened, all the adults may protect the young. Male California sea lions have been observed to help shield swimming pups from predators. Males can also pose threats to the safety of pups, particularly during fights. Pups of some species may be abducted, assaulted and killed by males, possibly due to sexual frustration.
Communication
Pinnipeds can produce a number of vocalizations. While most vocals are audible to the human ear, Weddell seals have been recorded in Antarctica making ultrasonic calls underwater. In addition, the vocals of northern elephant seals may produce infrasonic vibrations. Vocals are produced both in air and underwater; the former are more common among otariids and the latter among phocids. Antarctic seals are noisier on land or ice than Arctic seals due to the absence of polar bears. Male vocals are usually deeper than those of the females. Vocalizations are particularly important during the breeding seasons. Dominant male elephant seals display their status and power with "clap-threats" and loud drum-like calls that may be modified by the proboscis. Male otariids have strong barks, growls and roars. Male walruses are known to produce gong-like calls when attempting to attract females, these are amplified underwater with inflatable throat sacs.
The Weddell seal has perhaps the most extensive vocal repertoire, producing both airborne and underwater sounds. Trilling, gluping, chirping, chugging and knocking are some examples of the calls produced underwater. When warning other seals, the calls may be pronounced by "prefixes" and "suffixes". The underwater vocals of Weddell seals can last 70 seconds, which is long for a marine mammal call. Some calls have about seven rhythm patterns and could be categorized as "songs". Similar calls have been recorded in other Antarctic seals and in bearded seals. In some pinniped species, there appear to be regional dialects or even individual variations in vocalizations. These differences are likely important for territorial males recognizing their neighbors and mothers and pups who need to remain in contact on crowded beaches. Female seals emit a "pulsed, bawling" contact call, while pups respond by squawking. Contact calls are particularly important for otariid mothers returning from sea. Other vocalizations produced by seals include grunts, rasps, rattles, creaks, warbles, clicks and whistles.

Non-vocal communication is not as common in pinnipeds as in cetaceans. Nevertheless, when they feel threatened, hauled-out harbor seals and Baikal seals may slap themselves with their flippers to create a warning sound. Teeth chattering, hisses and exhalations are also made as aggressive warnings by pinnipeds. Visual displays also occur: Ross seals resting on the ice will show the stripes on their chests and bare their teeth to a perceived threat, while swimming Weddell seals will make an S-shaped posture to intimidate rivals under the ice. Male hooded seals use their inflatable nasal membranes to display to and attract females.
Intelligence
In a match-to-sample task study, a single California sea lion was able to demonstrate an understanding of symmetry, transitivity and equivalence; a second seal was unable to complete the tasks. They demonstrate the ability to understand simple syntax and commands when taught an artificial sign language, though they only rarely used the signs semantically or logically. In 2011, a captive California sea lion named Ronan was recorded bobbing its head in synchrony to musical rhythms. This "rhythmic entrainment" was previously seen only in humans, parrots and other birds possessing vocal mimicry. Harbor seals have been found to adapt quickly when presented with changes to stimuli in regards to rewards and non-rewards. Adult male elephant seals can recognize each other's vocalizations by remembering the rhythm and timbre. In the 1970s, a captive harbor seal named Hoover was trained to imitate human speech and laughter.
For sea lions used in entertainment, trainers toss a ball at the animal or simply place the object on its nose, so it will eventually understand the behavior desired. A sea lion may need a year of training before it can publicly perform. Its long-term memory allows it to perform a trick after as much as three months of non-performance.
Human relationsIn culture
Various human cultures have for millennia depicted pinnipeds. In Homer's Odyssey, the sea god Proteus shepherds a colony of seals. In northern Scotland, Celts of Orkney and the Hebrides believed in selkies—seals that could change into humans and walk on land. In Inuit mythology, they are associated with the goddess Sedna, who sometimes transformed into a seal. It was believed that marine mammals, including seals, came from her severed fingers. In modern culture, pinnipeds are thought of as cute, playful and comical figures.
In captivity
Pinnipeds can be found in facilities around the world, as their size and playfulness make them popular attractions. Seals have been kept in captivity since at least ancient Rome and their trainability was noticed by Pliny the Elder. Zoologist Georges Cuvier noted during the 19th century that wild seals show considerable affection for humans and stated that they are second only to some monkeys among wild animals in their easy tamability. Francis Galton noted in his seminal work on domestication that seals were a spectacular example of an animal that would most likely never be domesticated, despite their friendliness, survivability and "desire for comfort", because they serve no practical use for humans.

Some modern exhibits have a pool with artificial haul-out sites and a rocky background, while others have seals housed in shelters located above a pool which they can jump into. More elaborate exhibits contain deep pools that can be viewed underwater with rock-mimicking cement as haul-out areas. The most popular captive pinniped is the California sea lion, due to its trainability and adaptability. Other commonly kept species include the grey seal and harbor seal. Larger animals like walruses and Steller sea lions are much less common. Some organizations, such as the Humane Society of the United States and World Animal Protection, object to keeping marine mammals in captivity. They state that the exhibits could not be large enough to house animals that have evolved to be migratory, and a pool could never replace the size and biodiversity of the ocean. They also state that the tricks performed for audiences are "exaggerated variations of their natural behaviors" and distract the people from the animal's unnatural environment.
California sea lions are used in military applications by the U.S. Navy Marine Mammal Program, including detecting naval mines and enemy divers. In the Persian Gulf, the animals have been trained to swim behind divers approaching a U.S. naval ship and attach a clamp with a rope to the diver's leg. Navy officials say that the sea lions can do this in seconds, before the enemy realizes what happened. Organizations like PETA believe that such operations put the animals in danger. The Navy insists that the sea lions are removed once their job is done.
Hunting
Humans have hunted seals since the Stone Age. Originally, seals were merely hit with clubs during haul-out. Eventually, more lethal weapons were used, like spears and harpoons. They were also trapped in nets. The use of firearms in seal hunting during the modern era drastically increased the number of killings. Pinnipeds are typically hunted for their meat and blubber. The skins of fur seals and phocids are made into coats, and the tusks of walruses have been used as ivory. There is a distinction made between the subsistence hunting of seals by indigenous peoples of the Arctic and commercial hunting: subsistence hunters depend on seal products for survival. National and international authorities have given special treatment to aboriginal hunters since their methods of killing are seen as more sustainable and smaller in scope. However indigenous people have recently used more modern technology and are profiting more from seal products in the marketplace. Some anthropologists argue that the term "subsistence" should also apply to these activities, as long as they are local in scale. More than 100,000 phocids (especially ringed seals) as well as around 10,000 walruses are harvested annually by native hunters.

Commercial sealing rivaled whaling as an important industry throughout history. Harvested species included harp seals, hooded seals, Caspian seals, elephant seals, walruses and all species of fur seal. After the 1960s, the harvesting of seals decreased substantially as an industry after the Canadian government implemented measures to protect female seals and restrict the hunting season. Several species that were commercially exploited have rebounded in numbers; for example, Antarctic fur seals may have reached their pre-harvesting numbers. The northern elephant seal nearly went extinct in the late 19th century, with only a small population remaining on Guadalupe Island. It has since recolonized much of its historic range, but has a population bottleneck. Conversely, the Mediterranean monk seal was extirpated from much of the Mediterranean and its current range is still limited.
Several species of pinniped continue to be exploited. The Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals protects species within the Antarctic and surrounding waters, but allows restricted hunting of crabeater seals, leopard seals and Weddell seals. Weddell seal hunting is forbidden between September and February if the animal is older than a year, to ensure healthy population growth. The Government of Canada permits the hunting of harp seals. This has been met with controversy and debate. Proponents of seal hunts insist that the animals are killed humanely and the white-coated pups are not taken, while opponents argue that it is irresponsible to kill harp seals as they are already threatened by declining habitat.
The Caribbean monk seal has been killed and exploited by European settlers and their descendants since 1494, starting with Christopher Columbus himself. The seals were easy targets for organized sealers, fishermen, turtle hunters and buccaneers because they evolved with little pressure from terrestrial predators and were thus "genetically tame". In the Bahamas, as many as 100 seals were slaughtered in one night. The species was considered to be already extinct by the mid-nineteenth century until a small colony was found near the Yucatán Peninsula in 1866. Seal killings continued, and the last reliable report of the animal alive was in 1952 at Serranilla Bank. The IUCN declared it extinct in 1996. The Japanese sea lion was common around the Japanese islands, but overexploitation and competition from fisheries drastically decreased the population in the 1930s. The last recorded individual was a juvenile in 1974.
Conservation issues
As of 2021, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) recognizes 36 pinniped species. With the Japanese sea lion and the Caribbean monk seal recently extinct, ten more are considered at risk. They are ranked as:

"Endangered": Hawaiian monk seal, Mediterranean monk seal, Galápagos fur seal, Australian sea lion, New Zealand sea lion, Caspian seal, and Galápagos sea lion.
"Vulnerable": northern fur seal, hooded seal, and walrus.
Pinnipeds face various threats. They are unintentionally caught in fishing nets by commercial fisheries and accidentally swallow fishing hooks. Gillnetting and seine netting is a significant cause of mortality in seals and other marine mammals. Species commonly entangled include California sea lions, Hawaiian monk seals, northern fur seals and Cape fur seals. Pinnipeds are also affected by marine pollution. Organic chemicals tend to accumulate in these animals since they are high in the food chain and have large reserves of blubber. Lactating mothers can pass the toxins on to their young. These pollutants can cause gastrointestinal cancers, and decreased fertility and immunity to infectious diseases. Other man-made threats include habitat destruction by oil and gas exploitation, encroachment by boats, and underwater noise.

Species that live in polar habitats are vulnerable to the effects of climate change on oceans, particularly declines in sea ice. In 2010 and 2011, sea ice in the Northwest Atlantic was at or near an all-time low and harp seals as well as ringed seals that bred on thin ice saw increased death rates. In the Antarctic, the decreased duration and extent of the sea ice and nutrient availability could potentially reduce the survival of Weddell seal pups and may have important implications for population growth rates.  Antarctic fur seals in South Georgia in the South Atlantic saw major decreases over a 20-year study, during which scientists measured increased sea surface temperature anomalies.
Some species have become so numerous that they conflict with local people. In the United States, pinnipeds are protected under the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 (MMPA). Since that year, California sea lion populations have risen to 250,000. These animals began exploiting more man-made environments, like docks, for haul-out sites. Many docks are not designed to withstand the weight of several resting sea lions. Wildlife managers have used various methods to control the animals, and some city officials have redesigned docks so they can better resist sea lion use. Inland-living New Zealand sea lions face unique human conflicts such as road mortality and run-ins with human infrastructure. Seals also conflict with fisheries; a 2024 metastudy found that globally pinnipeds affected over 33 percent of fishing days and stole over 13 percent of catches. In 2007, MMPA was amended to permit the lethal removal of sea lions from salmon runs at Bonneville Dam. In the 1980s and 1990s, South African politicians and fishermen demanded that brown fur seals be culled, believing that the animals competed with commercial fisheries. Scientific studies found that culling fur seals would actually have a negative effect on the fishing industry, and the culling option was dropped in 1993.
Population monitoring methods for pinnipeds increasingly include aerial imagery and automated image-processing workflows, which can support repeated surveys of colonies and haul-out sites.


This is a list of the mammal species recorded in Cyprus. There are seventeen mammal species native to Cyprus, excluding feral species. Most of the land mammals have been introduced. The other mammal species present on the islands during the Late Pleistocene, including the Cyprus dwarf hippopotamus, the Cyprus dwarf elephant, and Cyprus genet, are extinct.
The following tags are used to highlight each species' conservation status as assessed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature:
Order: Lagomorpha (rabbits and hares)
Despite their appearance, lagomorphs are not rodents, and fall in their own order. They consist of rabbits, hares, and pikas.

Family: Leporidae
Genus: Lepus
Cape hare, L. capensis LC
Order: Rodentia (rodents)
Rodents make up the largest order of mammals, with over 40% of mammalian species. They have two incisors in the upper and lower jaw which grow continually and must be kept short by gnawing. Most rodents are small though the capybara can weigh up to 45 kg (99 lb).

Suborder: Sciurognathi
Family: Muridae (mice, rats, voles, gerbils, hamsters, etc.)
Subfamily: Deomyinae
Genus: Acomys
Cyprus spiny mouse, A. nesiotes DD
Subfamily: Murinae
Genus: Mus
Cypriot mouse, M. cypriacus LC
House mouse, M. musculus LC introduced
Genus: Rattus
Brown rat, R. norvegicus LC introduced
Black rat, R. rattus LC introduced
Order: Erinaceomorpha (hedgehogs and gymnures)
The order Erinaceomorpha contains a single family, Erinaceidae, which comprise the hedgehogs and gymnures. The hedgehogs are easily recognised by their spines while gymnures look more like large rats.

Family: Erinaceidae (hedgehogs)
Subfamily: Erinaceinae
Genus: Hemiechinus
Long-eared hedgehog, H. auritus LC
Order: Soricomorpha (shrews, moles, and solenodons)
The "shrew-forms" are insectivorous mammals. The shrews and solenodons closely resemble mice while the moles are stout-bodied burrowers.

Family: Soricidae (shrews)
Subfamily: Crocidurinae
Genus: Crocidura
Lesser white-toothed shrew, C. suaveolens LC introduced
Güldenstädt's shrew, C. gueldenstaedtii LC
Genus: Suncus
Etruscan shrew, S. etruscus LC
Order: Chiroptera (bats)
The bats' most distinguishing feature is that their forelimbs are developed as wings, making them the only mammals capable of flight. Bat species account for about 20% of all mammals.

Family: Pteropodidae (flying foxes, Old World fruit bats)
Subfamily: Pteropodinae
Genus: Rousettus
Egyptian fruit bat, R. aegyptiacus LC
Family: Vespertilionidae
Subfamily: Miniopterinae
Genus: Miniopterus
Common bent-wing bat, M. schreibersii VU
Subfamily: Myotinae
Genus: Myotis
Greater mouse-eared bat, M. myotis LC
Subfamily: Vespertilioninae
Genus: Pipistrellus
Common pipistrelle, P. pipistrellus LC
Genus: Plecotus
Grey long-eared bat, P. austriacus NT
Family: Rhinolophidae
Subfamily: Rhinolophinae
Genus: Rhinolophus
Blasius's horseshoe bat, R. blasii LC
Mediterranean horseshoe bat, R. euryale NT
Greater horseshoe bat, R. ferrumequinum LC
Order: Cetacea (whales)
The order Cetacea includes whales, dolphins and porpoises. They are the mammals most fully adapted to aquatic life with a spindle-shaped nearly hairless body, protected by a thick layer of blubber, and forelimbs and tail modified to provide propulsion underwater.
Species listed below also includes species being recorded in Levantine Sea.

Suborder: Mysticeti
Family: Balaenopteridae
Genus: Balaenoptera
Common minke whale, B. acutorostrata LC
Fin whale, B. physalus EN
Subfamily: Megapterinae
Genus: Megaptera
Humpback whale, M. novaeangliae LC
Suborder: Odontoceti
Family: Physeteridae
Genus: Physeter
Sperm whale, P. macrocephalus VU
Family: Ziphidae
Genus: Mesoplodon
Gervais' beaked whale, M. europaeus DD
Genus: Ziphius
Cuvier's beaked whale, Z. cavirostris LC
Superfamily: Platanistoidea
Family: Delphinidae (marine dolphins)
Genus: Delphinus
Short-beaked common dolphin, D. delphis DD
Genus: Globicephala
Long-finned pilot whale, G. melas DD
Genus: Grampus
Risso's dolphin, G. griseus DD
Genus: Orcinus
Orca, O. orca DD
Genus: Pseudorca
False killer whale, P. crassidens DD
Genus: Stenella
Striped dolphin, S. coeruleoalba VU
Genus: Steno
Rough-toothed dolphin, S. bredanensis LC
Genus: Tursiops
Common bottlenose dolphin, T. truncatus LC
Order: Carnivora (carnivorans)
There are over 260 species of carnivorans, the majority of which feed primarily on meat. They have a characteristic skull shape and dentition.

Suborder: Caniformia
Family: Canidae (dogs, foxes)
Genus: Vulpes
Red fox, V. vulpes LC
Cypriot red fox, V. v. indutus
Family: Phocidae (earless seals)
Genus: Monachus
Mediterranean monk seal, M. monachus EN
Order: Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates)
The even-toed ungulates are ungulates whose weight is borne about equally by the third and fourth toes, rather than mostly or entirely by the third as in perissodactyls. There are about 220 artiodactyl species, including many that are of great economic importance to humans.

Family: Bovidae (cattle, antelope, sheep, goats)
Subfamily: Caprinae
Genus: Ovis
Mouflon, O. gmelini NT
Cyprus mouflon, O. g. ophion


The Mammals are a contemporary folk rock band based in the Hudson Valley area of New York, in the United States.
The band tours internationally and consists of founding members and principal songwriters Mike Merenda (guitar, banjo) and Ruth Ungar (fiddle, guitar) plus Konrad Meissner (drums) and a rotating cast of players on bass, organ, and pedal steel.
The Mammals sing and play in a style heavily influenced by traditional folk, soul, old-time, blues, Cajun, Celtic and rock and roll. Their lyrics sometimes address political and environmental concerns; topics such as war, social justice, and sustainability. Ungar is the daughter of fiddler and composer Jay Ungar, who is best known for his composition Ashokan Farewell which the band also performs.
Band history
Merenda, Ungar and Tao Rodríguez-Seeger formed The Mammals in 2001. Initially a quartet with Alicia Jo Rabins on the fiddle[2] they quickly shifted to a trio with Ungar as the sole fiddler. In 2004, they became a quintet adding drummer Ken Maiuri and bassist Pierce Woodward. Chris Merenda, brother to Mike, joined the band in 2004 replacing Maiuri on the drums. Woodward left in 2005, replaced by Dango Rose and subsequently Jacob Silver on bass.
In 2002 and 2005, they performed as part of Arlo Guthrie's annual holiday concert at Carnegie Hall. In 2005, a performance of their song The Bush Boys caused The Mammals to be censored at a Lafayette, LA festival venue.
Between 2001 and 2007, The Mammals collaborated on stage with their peers Sarah Lee Guthrie & Johnny Irion, Crooked Still, Foghorn Stringband, Uncle Earl, Nickel Creek, and The Duhks; and with their mentors Jay Ungar and Molly Mason, Arlo Guthrie, Pete Seeger, Mike Seeger, Odetta, and Utah Phillips.
In 2008, The Mammals took a hiatus to pursue other musical endeavors.
In 2017, the band re-emerged with the release of the video On My Way Home (Feb 2017) and the single Culture War (March 2017.)
In October 2017, The Mammals began soliciting support from their fans on the crowdfunding platform Patreon.
In April 2018, they released the full album Sunshiner recorded at the band's home studio Humble Abode Music with co-producer Adam Armstrong. The title track, a nod to alternative energy, was one of The Americana Music Association's "Top 100 Albums and Songs for 2018" and was nominated by the International Folk Music Awards for “2018 Song of the Year.” The album also featured the environmentally themed a capella ballad My Baby Drinks Water.
In December 2018, they announced the release of five new singles, donating 100% of download proceeds to specific causes relating to each song.
Performances
The Mammals have performed nationally across the USA, and internationally in Canada, Australia, Denmark, and the UK.
In 2007 they appeared at the National Folk Festival in Canberra, Australia and the Tønder Festival in Tønder, Denmark. In 2017-18 they performed at Grey Fox Bluegrass Festival, Green River Festival, Clearwater Festival, Wintergrass Festival in Bellvue, WA, and the FreshGrass Festival at Mass MOCA. In 2019 they are scheduled to perform at the Suwannee Spring Reunion in Live Oak, FL and the Four Corners Folk Festival in Pagosa Springs, CO. They have performed multiple times at Levon Helm Studios in Woodstock, NY and regularly perform at the Winter Hoot and Summer Hoot folk music festivals, which have been produced by Merenda and Ungar bi-annually at the Ashokan Center in Olivebridge, NY since 2013.
Side projects
In 2006, Rodríguez-Seeger recorded the album Que Vaya Bien with Roy Brown, Puerto Rican folk singer; and Tito Auger, lead singer for Puerto Rican rock group Fiel A La Vega. In collaboration with Jacob Silver, Laura Cortese and Robin McMillan, Rodríguez-Seeger released an EP as The Anarchist Orchestra in 2007 and the full-length album Rise and Bloom as Tao Seeger Band in 2010. The group performed that summer at the Newport Folk Festival.
In 2008, Merenda and Ungar began touring as Mike + Ruthy to support their duo recordings.
Ungar also recorded and performed in the bands Sometymes Why (2005-2009) and the Wayfaring Strangers (2001-2009).)
Merenda occasionally performs solo under his own name or the moniker Ruthless Mike.
Discography
They have released seven albums, two EPs, and are featured on the Wheatland Music Festival compilation, ...At This Stage.:

Born Live (2001)
Evolver (2002)
Migration (EP) (2004)
Rock That Babe (2004)
...At This Stage (various artists) (2004)
Departure (2006)
Bootleg Six-Pack (EP) (2007)
Sunshiner (2018)
Nonet (2020)
Touch Grass, Vols. I & II (2025)


The brain is an organ that serves as the center of the nervous system in all vertebrate and most invertebrate animals. It consists of nervous tissue and is typically located in the head (cephalization), usually near organs for special senses such as vision, hearing, and olfaction. Being the most specialized organ, it is responsible for receiving information from the sensory nervous system, processing that information (thought, cognition, and intelligence) and the coordination of motor control (muscle activity) and the endocrine system.
While invertebrate brains arise from paired segmental ganglia (each of which is only responsible for the respective body segment) of the ventral nerve cord, vertebrate brains develop axially from the midline dorsal nerve cord as a vesicular enlargement at the rostral end of the neural tube, with centralized control over all body segments. All vertebrate brains can be embryonically divided into three parts: the forebrain (prosencephalon, subdivided into telencephalon and diencephalon), midbrain (mesencephalon) and hindbrain (rhombencephalon, subdivided into metencephalon and myelencephalon). The spinal cord, which directly coordinates somatic functions below the head, can be considered a caudal extension of the myelencephalon enclosed inside the vertebral column. Together, the brain and spinal cord constitute the central nervous system in all vertebrates.
In humans, the cerebral cortex contains approximately 14–16 billion neurons, and the estimated number of neurons in the cerebellum is 55–70 billion. Each neuron is connected by synapses to several thousand other neurons, typically communicating with one another via cytoplasmic processes known as dendrites and axons. Axons are usually myelinated and carry trains of rapid micro-electric signal pulses called action potentials to target specific recipient cells in other areas of the brain or distant parts of the body. The prefrontal cortex, which controls executive functions, is particularly well developed in humans.
Physiologically, brains exert centralized control over a body's other organs. They act on the rest of the body both by generating patterns of muscle activity and by driving the secretion of chemicals called hormones. This centralized control allows rapid and coordinated responses to changes in the environment. Some basic types of responsiveness such as reflexes can be mediated by the spinal cord or peripheral ganglia, but sophisticated purposeful control of behavior based on complex sensory input requires the information-integrating capabilities of a centralized brain.
The operations of individual brain cells are now understood in considerable detail but the way they cooperate in ensembles of millions is yet to be solved. Recent models in modern neuroscience treat the brain as a biological computer, very different in mechanism from a digital computer, but similar in the sense that it acquires information from the surrounding world, stores it, and processes it in a variety of ways.
This article compares the properties of brains across the entire range of animal species, with the greatest attention to vertebrates. It deals with the human brain insofar as it shares the properties of other brains. The ways in which the human brain differs from other brains are covered in the human brain article. Several topics that might be covered here are instead covered there because much more can be said about them in a human context. The most important that are covered in the human brain article are brain disease and the effects of brain damage.
Structure
The shape and size of the brain varies greatly between species, and identifying common features is often difficult. Nevertheless, there are a number of principles of brain architecture that apply across a wide range of species. Some aspects of brain structure are common to almost the entire range of animal species; others distinguish "advanced" brains from more primitive ones, or distinguish vertebrates from invertebrates.
The simplest way to gain information about brain anatomy is by visual inspection, but many more sophisticated techniques have been developed. Brain tissue in its natural state is too soft to work with, but it can be hardened by immersion in alcohol or other fixatives, and then sliced apart for examination of the interior. Visually, the interior of the brain consists of areas of so-called grey matter, with a dark color, separated by areas of white matter, with a lighter color. Further information can be gained by staining slices of brain tissue with a variety of chemicals that bring out areas where specific types of molecules are present in high concentrations. It is also possible to examine the microstructure of brain tissue using a microscope, and to trace the pattern of connections from one brain area to another.
Cellular structure
The brains of all species are composed primarily of two broad classes of brain cells: neurons and glial cells. Glial cells (also known as glia or neuroglia) come in several types, and perform a number of critical functions, including structural support, metabolic support, insulation, and guidance of development. Neurons, however, are usually considered the most important cells in the brain. In humans, the cerebral cortex contains approximately 14–16 billion neurons, and the estimated number of neurons in the cerebellum is 55–70 billion. Each neuron is connected by synapses to several thousand other neurons. The property that makes neurons unique is their ability to send signals to specific target cells, sometimes over long distances. They send these signals by means of an axon, which is a thin protoplasmic fiber that extends from the cell body and projects, usually with numerous branches, to other areas, sometimes nearby, sometimes in distant parts of the brain or body. The length of an axon can be extraordinary: for example, if a pyramidal cell (an excitatory neuron) of the cerebral cortex were magnified so that its cell body became the size of a human body, its axon, equally magnified, would become a cable a few centimeters in diameter, extending more than a kilometer. These axons transmit signals in the form of electrochemical pulses called action potentials, which last less than a thousandth of a second and travel along the axon at speeds of 1–100 meters per second. Some neurons emit action potentials constantly, at rates of 10–100 per second, usually in irregular patterns; other neurons are quiet most of the time, but occasionally emit a burst of action potentials.
Axons transmit signals to other neurons by means of specialized junctions called synapses. A single axon may make as many as several thousand synaptic connections with other cells. When an action potential, traveling along an axon, arrives at a synapse, it causes a chemical called a neurotransmitter to be released. The neurotransmitter binds to receptor molecules in the membrane of the target cell.
Synapses are the key functional elements of the brain. The essential function of the brain is cell-to-cell communication, and synapses are the points at which communication occurs. The human brain has been estimated to contain approximately 100 trillion synapses; even the brain of a fruit fly contains several million. The functions of these synapses are very diverse: some are excitatory (exciting the target cell); others are inhibitory; others work by activating second messenger systems that change the internal chemistry of their target cells in complex ways. A large number of synapses are dynamically modifiable; that is, they are capable of changing strength in a way that is controlled by the patterns of signals that pass through them. It is widely believed that activity-dependent modification of synapses is the brain's primary mechanism for learning and memory.
Most of the space in the brain is taken up by axons, which are often bundled together in what are called nerve fiber tracts. A myelinated axon is wrapped in a fatty insulating sheath of myelin, which serves to greatly increase the speed of signal propagation. (There are also unmyelinated axons). Myelin is white, making parts of the brain filled exclusively with nerve fibers appear as light-colored white matter, in contrast to the darker-colored grey matter that marks areas with high densities of neuron cell bodies.
EvolutionGeneric bilaterian nervous system
Except for a few primitive organisms such as sponges (which have no nervous system) and cnidarians (which have a diffuse nervous system consisting of a nerve net), all living multicellular animals are bilaterians, meaning animals with a bilaterally symmetric body plan (that is, left and right sides that are approximate mirror images of each other). All bilaterians are thought to have descended from a common ancestor that appeared late in the Cryogenian period, 700–650 million years ago, and it has been hypothesized that this common ancestor had the shape of a simple tubeworm with a segmented body. At a schematic level, that basic worm-shape continues to be reflected in the body and nervous system architecture of all modern bilaterians, including vertebrates. The fundamental bilateral body form is a tube with a hollow gut cavity running from the mouth to the anus, and a nerve cord with an enlargement (a ganglion) for each body segment, with an especially large ganglion at the front, called the brain. The brain is small and simple in some species, such as nematode worms; in other species, such as vertebrates, it is a large and very complex organ. Some types of worms, such as leeches, also have an enlarged ganglion at the back end of the nerve cord, known as a "tail brain".
There are coarse homologies in the anterior-posterior patterning as well as axial patterning of the brain across the Bilateria, as indicated by comparison of gene expression patterns during development. There are a few types of existing bilaterians that lack a recognizable brain, including echinoderms and tunicates, in which these genes specify the neurosensory and secretory apical organ. It has not been definitively established whether the existence of these brainless species indicates that the earliest bilaterians lacked a brain (and instead had an apical-like organ), or whether their ancestors evolved in a way that led to the disappearance of a previously existing brain structure. Using these relationships, some brain regions from very different lineages can be considered homologous, though the specific correspondences are not always clear (such as in mapping the midbrain-hindbrain boundary of vertebrates to insect brains).
The bilaterian forebrain probably contains a fusion of two ancestral nervous systems. The aforementioned apical-homologus part, specified by anterior-posterior (head-tail) patterning genes such as six3 and rx, handles sensory functions such as the circadian clock (in vertebrates, the pinea and retina) and hormone secretion (e.g. melatonin and vasotocin in vertebrates). The other part is related to the axial pattern genes that specify the blastopore, which specifies a nervous system on the opposite side of the apical system in cnidarians (jellyfish) focused on locomotion. In the urbilaterian ancestor, the blastoporal patterning genes moved sideways to become a axial/mediolateral patterning system, leading to the nerve cord and, as it contacts the apical nervous system, the nk2+ and sim+ regions of the ventral forebrain (e.g. the prethalamus, thalamus, posterior tuberculum in vertebrates). These systems serve a function in motor control and sensory integration and prominently feature dopaminergic neurons. This fusion is so ancient that in today's animals, some cells express markers of both systems, especially among mammals where nkx2 has expanded much further into anterior parts of the brain. (An updated model is that the nerve cords evolved independently in various bilaterian lineages using a similar set of axial-patterning genes.)
Invertebrates
This category includes tardigrades, arthropods, molluscs, and numerous types of worms. The diversity of invertebrate body plans is matched by an equal diversity in brain structures.
Two groups of invertebrates have notably complex brains: arthropods (insects, crustaceans, arachnids, and others), and cephalopods (octopuses, squids, and similar molluscs). The brains of arthropods and cephalopods arise from twin parallel nerve cords that extend through the body of the animal. Arthropods have a central brain, the supraesophageal ganglion, with three divisions and large optical lobes behind each eye for visual processing. Cephalopods such as the octopus and squid have the largest brains of any invertebrates.
There are several invertebrate species whose brains have been studied intensively because they have properties that make them convenient for experimental work:

Fruit flies (Drosophila), because of the large array of techniques available for studying their genetics, have been a natural subject for studying the role of genes in brain development. In spite of the large evolutionary distance between insects and mammals, many aspects of Drosophila neurogenetics have been shown to be relevant to humans. The first biological clock genes, for example, were identified by examining Drosophila mutants that showed disrupted daily activity cycles. A search in the genomes of vertebrates revealed a set of analogous genes, which were found to play similar roles in the mouse biological clock—and therefore almost certainly in the human biological clock as well. Studies done on Drosophila, also show that most neuropil regions of the brain are continuously reorganized throughout life in response to specific living conditions.
The nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans, like Drosophila, has been studied largely because of its importance in genetics. In the early 1970s, Sydney Brenner chose it as a model organism for studying the way that genes control development. One of the advantages of working with this worm is that the body plan is very stereotyped: the nervous system of the hermaphrodite contains exactly 302 neurons, always in the same places, making identical synaptic connections in every worm. Brenner's team sliced worms into thousands of ultrathin sections and photographed each one under an electron microscope, then visually matched fibers from section to section, to map out every neuron and synapse in the entire body.
The sea slug Aplysia californica was chosen by Nobel Prize-winning neurophysiologist Eric Kandel as a model for studying the cellular basis of learning and memory, because of the simplicity and accessibility of its nervous system, and it has been examined in hundreds of experiments.
The complete "wiring diagrams" (connectome) of C. elegans was created in 1986, enabling a multitude of studies that would otherwise have not been possible. A few Drosophila connectomes were achieved in the 2010s and 2020s; as fof 2026, there is one full female larval connectome, one full adult male CNS connectome, and one full adult female CNS connectome, in addition to connectomes for other parts and coarser ones.
Vertebrates
The first vertebrates appeared over 500 million years ago (Mya) during the Cambrian period, and may have resembled the modern jawless fish (hagfish and lamprey) in form. Jawed vertebrates appeared by 445 Mya, tetrapods by 350 Mya, amniotes by 310 Mya and mammaliaforms by 200 Mya (approximately). Each vertebrate clade has an equally long evolutionary history, but the brains of modern fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals show a gradient of size and complexity that roughly follows the evolutionary sequence. All of these brains contain the same set of basic anatomical structures, but many are rudimentary in the hagfish, whereas in mammals the foremost part (forebrain, especially the telencephalon) is greatly developed and expanded.
Brains are most commonly compared in terms of their mass. The relationship between brain size, body size and other variables has been studied across a wide range of vertebrate species. As a rule of thumb, brain size increases with body size, but not in a simple linear proportion. In general, smaller animals tend to have proportionally larger brains, measured as a fraction of body size. For mammals, the relationship between brain volume and body mass essentially follows a power law with an exponent of about 0.75. This formula describes the central tendency, but every family of mammals departs from it to some degree, in a way that reflects in part the complexity of their behavior. For example, primates have brains 5 to 10 times larger than the formula predicts. Predators, who have to implement various hunting strategies against the ever changing anti-predator adaptations, tend to have larger brains relative to body size than their prey.

All vertebrate brains share a common underlying form, which appears most clearly during early stages of embryonic development. In its earliest form, the brain appears as three vesicular swellings at the front end of the neural tube; these swellings eventually become the forebrain (prosencephalon), midbrain (mesencephalon) and hindbrain (rhombencephalon), respectively. At the earliest stages of brain development, the three areas are roughly equal in size. In many aquatic/semiaquatic vertebrates such as fish and amphibians, the three parts remain similar in size in adults, but in terrestrial tetrapods such as mammals, the forebrain becomes much larger than the other parts, the hindbrain develops a bulky dorsal extension known as the cerebellum, and the midbrain becomes very small as a result.
The brains of vertebrates are made of very soft tissue. Living brain tissue is pinkish on the outside and mostly white on the inside, with subtle variations in color. Vertebrate brains are surrounded by a system of connective tissue membranes called meninges, which separate the skull from the brain. Cerebral arteries pierce the outer two layers of the meninges, the dura and arachnoid mater, into the subarachnoid space and perfuse the brain parenchyma via arterioles perforating into the innermost layer of the meninges, the pia mater. The endothelial cells in the cerebral blood vessel walls are joined tightly to one another, forming the blood–brain barrier, which blocks the passage of many toxins and pathogens (though at the same time blocking antibodies and some drugs, thereby presenting special challenges in treatment of diseases of the brain). As a result of the osmotic restriction by the blood-brain barrier, the metabolites within the brain are cleared mostly by bulk flow of the cerebrospinal fluid within the glymphatic system instead of via venules like other parts of the body.
Neuroanatomists usually divide the vertebrate brain into six main subregions: the telencephalon (the cerebral hemispheres), diencephalon (thalamus and hypothalamus), mesencephalon (midbrain), cerebellum, pons and medulla oblongata, with the midbrain, pons and medulla often collectively called the brainstem. Each of these areas has a complex internal structure. Some parts, such as the cerebral cortex and the cerebellar cortex, are folded into convoluted gyri and sulci in order to maximize surface area within the available intracranial space. Other parts, such as the thalamus and hypothalamus, consist of many small clusters of nuclei known as "ganglia". Thousands of distinguishable areas can be identified within the vertebrate brain based on fine distinctions of neural structure, chemistry, and connectivity.

Although the same basic components are present in all vertebrate brains, some branches of vertebrate evolution have led to substantial distortions of brain geometry, especially in the forebrain area. The brain of a shark shows the basic components in a straightforward way, but in teleost fishes (the great majority of existing fish species), the forebrain has become "everted", like a sock turned inside out. In birds, there are also major changes in forebrain structure. These distortions can make it difficult to match brain components from one species with those of another species.
Here is a list of some of the most important vertebrate brain components, along with a brief description of their functions as currently understood:

The medulla, along with the spinal cord, contains many small nuclei involved in a wide variety of sensory and involuntary motor functions such as vomiting, heart rate and digestive processes.
The pons lies in the brainstem directly above the medulla. Among other things, it contains nuclei that control often voluntary but simple acts such as sleep, respiration, swallowing, bladder function, equilibrium, eye movement, facial expressions, and posture.
The hypothalamus is a small region at the base of the forebrain, whose complexity and importance belies its size. It is composed of numerous small nuclei, each with distinct connections and neurochemistry. The hypothalamus is engaged in additional involuntary or partially voluntary acts such as sleep and wake cycles, eating and drinking, and the release of some hormones.
The thalamus is a collection of nuclei with diverse functions: some are involved in relaying information to and from the cerebral hemispheres, while others are involved in motivation. The subthalamic area (zona incerta) seems to contain action-generating systems for several types of "consummatory" behaviors such as eating, drinking, defecation, and copulation.
The cerebellum modulates the outputs of other brain systems, whether motor-related or thought related, to make them certain and precise. Removal of the cerebellum does not prevent an animal from doing anything in particular, but it makes actions hesitant and clumsy. This precision is not built-in but learned by trial and error. The muscle coordination learned while riding a bicycle is an example of a type of neural plasticity that may take place largely within the cerebellum. 10% of the brain's total volume consists of the cerebellum and 50% of all neurons are held within its structure.
The optic tectum allows actions to be directed toward points in space, most commonly in response to visual input. In mammals, it is usually referred to as the superior colliculus, and its best-studied function is to direct eye movements. It also directs reaching movements and other object-directed actions. It receives strong visual inputs, but also inputs from other senses that are useful in directing actions, such as auditory input in owls and input from the thermosensitive pit organs in snakes. In some primitive fishes, such as lampreys, this region is the largest part of the brain. The superior colliculus is part of the midbrain.
The pallium is a layer of grey matter that lies on the surface of the forebrain and is the most complex and most recent evolutionary development of the brain as an organ. In reptiles and mammals, it is called the cerebral cortex. Multiple functions involve the pallium, including smell and spatial memory. In mammals, where it becomes so large as to dominate the brain, it takes over functions from many other brain areas. In many mammals, the cerebral cortex consists of folded bulges called gyri that create deep furrows or fissures called sulci. The folds increase the surface area of the cortex and therefore increase the amount of gray matter and the amount of information that can be stored and processed.
The hippocampus, strictly speaking, is found only in mammals. However, the area it derives from, the medial pallium, has counterparts in all vertebrates. There is evidence that this part of the brain is involved in complex events such as spatial memory and navigation in fishes, birds, reptiles, and mammals.
The basal ganglia are a group of interconnected structures in the forebrain. The primary function of the basal ganglia appears to be action selection: they send inhibitory signals to all parts of the brain that can generate motor behaviors, and in the right circumstances can release the inhibition, so that the action-generating systems are able to execute their actions. Reward and punishment exert their most important neural effects by altering connections within the basal ganglia.
The olfactory bulb is a special structure that processes olfactory sensory signals and sends its output to the olfactory part of the pallium. It is a major brain component in many vertebrates, but is greatly reduced in humans and other primates (whose senses are dominated by information acquired by sight rather than smell).
Reptiles
Modern reptiles and mammals diverged from a common ancestor around 320 million years ago. The number of extant reptiles far exceeds the number of mammalian species, with 11,733 recognized species of reptiles compared to 5,884 extant mammals. Along with the species diversity, reptiles have diverged in terms of external morphology, from limbless to tetrapod gliders to armored chelonians, reflecting adaptive radiation to a diverse array of environments.
Morphological differences are reflected in the nervous system phenotype, such as: absence of lateral motor column neurons in snakes, which innervate limb muscles controlling limb movements; absence of motor neurons that innervate trunk muscles in tortoises; presence of innervation from the trigeminal nerve to pit organs responsible to infrared detection in snakes. Variation in size, weight, and shape of the brain can be found within reptiles. For instance, crocodilians have the largest brain volume to body weight proportion, followed by turtles, lizards, and snakes. Reptiles vary in the investment in different brain sections. Crocodilians have the largest telencephalon, while snakes have the smallest. Turtles have the largest diencephalon per body weight whereas crocodilians have the smallest. On the other hand, lizards have the largest mesencephalon.
Yet their brains share several characteristics revealed by recent anatomical, molecular, and ontogenetic studies. Vertebrates share the highest levels of similarities during embryological development, controlled by conserved transcription factors and signaling centers, including gene expression, morphological and cell type differentiation. In fact, high levels of transcriptional factors can be found in all areas of the brain in reptiles and mammals, with shared neuronal clusters enlightening brain evolution. Conserved transcription factors elucidate that evolution acted in different areas of the brain by either retaining similar morphology and function, or diversifying it.
Anatomically, the reptilian brain has less subdivisions than the mammalian brain, however it has numerous conserved aspects including the organization of the spinal cord and cranial nerve, as well as elaborated brain pattern of organization. Elaborated brains are characterized by migrated neuronal cell bodies away from the periventricular matrix, region of neuronal development, forming organized nuclear groups. Aside from reptiles and mammals, other vertebrates with elaborated brains include hagfish, galeomorph sharks, skates, rays, teleosts, and birds. Overall elaborated brains are subdivided in forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain.
The hindbrain coordinates and integrates sensory and motor inputs and outputs responsible for, but not limited to, walking, swimming, or flying. It contains input and output axons interconnecting the spinal cord, midbrain and forebrain transmitting information from the external and internal environments. The midbrain links sensory, motor, and integrative components received from the hindbrain, connecting it to the forebrain. The tectum, which includes the optic tectum and torus semicircularis, receives auditory, visual, and somatosensory inputs, forming integrated maps of the sensory and visual space around the animal. The tegmentum receives incoming sensory information and forwards motor responses to and from the forebrain. The isthmus connects the hindbrain with midbrain. The forebrain region is particularly well developed, is further divided into diencephalon and telencephalon. Diencephalon is related to regulation of eye and body movement in response to visual stimuli, sensory information, circadian rhythms, olfactory input, and autonomic nervous system. Telencephalon is related to control of movements, neurotransmitters and neuromodulators responsible for integrating inputs and transmitting outputs are present, sensory systems, and cognitive functions.
BirdsMammals
The most obvious difference between the brains of mammals and other vertebrates is their size. On average, a mammal has a brain roughly twice as large as that of a bird of the same body size, and ten times as large as that of a reptile of the same body size.
Size, however, is not the only difference: there are also substantial differences in shape. The hindbrain and midbrain of mammals are generally similar to those of other vertebrates, but dramatic differences appear in the forebrain, which is greatly enlarged and also altered in structure. The cerebral cortex is the part of the brain that most strongly distinguishes mammals. In non-mammalian vertebrates, the surface of the cerebrum is lined with a comparatively simple three-layered structure called the pallium. In mammals, the pallium evolves into a complex six-layered structure called neocortex or isocortex. Several areas at the edge of the neocortex, including the hippocampus and amygdala, are also much more extensively developed in mammals than in other vertebrates.
The elaboration of the cerebral cortex carries with it changes to other brain areas. The superior colliculus, which plays a major role in visual control of behavior in most vertebrates, shrinks to a small size in mammals, and many of its functions are taken over by visual areas of the cerebral cortex. The cerebellum of mammals contains a large portion (the neocerebellum) dedicated to supporting the cerebral cortex, which has no counterpart in other vertebrates.
In placentals, there is a wide nerve tract connecting the cerebral hemispheres called the corpus callosum.
Primates
The brains of humans and other primates contain the same structures as the brains of other mammals, but are generally larger in proportion to body size. The encephalization quotient (EQ) is used to compare brain sizes across species. It takes into account the nonlinearity of the brain-to-body relationship. Humans have an average EQ in the 7-to-8 range, while most other primates have an EQ in the 2-to-3 range. Dolphins have values higher than those of primates other than humans, but nearly all other mammals have EQ values that are substantially lower.
Most of the enlargement of the primate brain comes from a massive expansion of the cerebral cortex, especially the prefrontal cortex and the parts of the cortex involved in vision. The visual processing network of primates includes at least 30 distinguishable brain areas, with a complex web of interconnections. It has been estimated that visual processing areas occupy more than half of the total surface of the primate neocortex. The prefrontal cortex carries out functions that include planning, working memory, motivation, attention, and executive control. It takes up a much larger proportion of the brain for primates than for other species, and an especially large fraction of the human brain.
Development
The brain develops in an intricately orchestrated sequence of stages. It changes in shape from a simple swelling at the front of the nerve cord in the earliest embryonic stages, to a complex array of areas and connections. Neurons are created in special zones that contain stem cells, and then migrate through the tissue to reach their ultimate locations. Once neurons have positioned themselves, their axons sprout and navigate through the brain, branching and extending as they go, until the tips reach their targets and form synaptic connections. In a number of parts of the nervous system, neurons and synapses are produced in excessive numbers during the early stages, and then the unneeded ones are pruned away.
For vertebrates, the early stages of neural development are similar across all species. As the embryo transforms from a round blob of cells into a wormlike structure, a narrow strip of ectoderm running along the midline of the back is induced to become the neural plate, the precursor of the nervous system. The neural plate folds inward to form the neural groove, and then the lips that line the groove merge to enclose the neural tube, a hollow cord of cells with a fluid-filled ventricle at the center. At the front end, the ventricles and cord swell to form three vesicles that are the precursors of the prosencephalon (forebrain), mesencephalon (midbrain), and rhombencephalon (hindbrain). At the next stage, the forebrain splits into two vesicles called the telencephalon (which will contain the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, and related structures) and the diencephalon (which will contain the thalamus and hypothalamus). At about the same time, the hindbrain splits into the metencephalon (which will contain the cerebellum and pons) and the myelencephalon (which will contain the medulla oblongata). Each of these areas contains proliferative zones where neurons and glial cells are generated; the resulting cells then migrate, sometimes for long distances, to their final positions.
Once a neuron is in place, it extends dendrites and an axon into the area around it. Axons, because they commonly extend a great distance from the cell body and need to reach specific targets, grow in a particularly complex way. The tip of a growing axon consists of a blob of protoplasm called a growth cone, studded with chemical receptors. These receptors sense the local environment, causing the growth cone to be attracted or repelled by various cellular elements, and thus to be pulled in a particular direction at each point along its path. The result of this pathfinding process is that the growth cone navigates through the brain until it reaches its destination area, where other chemical cues cause it to begin generating synapses. Considering the entire brain, thousands of genes create products that influence axonal pathfinding.
The synaptic network that finally emerges is only partly determined by genes, though. In many parts of the brain, axons initially "overgrow", and then are "pruned" by mechanisms that depend on neural activity. In the projection from the eye to the midbrain, for example, the structure in the adult contains a very precise mapping, connecting each point on the surface of the retina to a corresponding point in a midbrain layer. In the first stages of development, each axon from the retina is guided to the right general vicinity in the midbrain by chemical cues, but then branches very profusely and makes initial contact with a wide swath of midbrain neurons. The retina, before birth, contains special mechanisms that cause it to generate waves of activity that originate spontaneously at a random point and then propagate slowly across the retinal layer. These waves are useful because they cause neighboring neurons to be active at the same time; that is, they produce a neural activity pattern that contains information about the spatial arrangement of the neurons. This information is exploited in the midbrain by a mechanism that causes synapses to weaken, and eventually vanish, if activity in an axon is not followed by activity of the target cell. The result of this sophisticated process is a gradual tuning and tightening of the map, leaving it finally in its precise adult form.
Similar things happen in other brain areas: an initial synaptic matrix is generated as a result of genetically determined chemical guidance, but then gradually refined by activity-dependent mechanisms, partly driven by internal dynamics, partly by external sensory inputs. In some cases, as with the retina-midbrain system, activity patterns depend on mechanisms that operate only in the developing brain, and apparently exist solely to guide development.
In humans and many other mammals, new neurons are created mainly before birth, and the infant brain contains substantially more neurons than the adult brain. There are, however, a few areas where new neurons continue to be generated throughout life. The two areas for which adult neurogenesis is well established are the olfactory bulb, which is involved in the sense of smell, and the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, where there is evidence that the new neurons play a role in storing newly acquired memories. With these exceptions, however, the set of neurons that is present in early childhood is the set that is present for life. Glial cells are different: as with most types of cells in the body, they are generated throughout the lifespan.
There has long been debate about whether the qualities of mind, personality, and intelligence can be attributed to heredity or to upbringing. Although many details remain to be settled, neuroscience shows that both factors are important. Genes determine both the general form of the brain and how it reacts to experience, but experience is required to refine the matrix of synaptic connections, resulting in greatly increased complexity. The presence or absence of experience is critical at key periods of development. Additionally, the quantity and quality of experience are important. For example, animals raised in enriched environments demonstrate thick cerebral cortices, indicating a high density of synaptic connections, compared to animals with restricted levels of stimulation.
Physiology
The functions of the brain depend on the ability of neurons to transmit electrochemical signals to other cells, and their ability to respond appropriately to electrochemical signals received from other cells. The electrical properties of neurons are controlled by a wide variety of biochemical and metabolic processes, most notably the interactions between neurotransmitters and receptors that take place at synapses.
Neurotransmitters and receptors
Neurotransmitters are chemicals that are released at synapses when the local membrane is depolarised and Ca2+ enters into the cell, typically when an action potential arrives at the synapse – neurotransmitters attach themselves to receptor molecules on the membrane of the synapse's target cell (or cells), and thereby alter the electrical or chemical properties of the receptor molecules. With few exceptions, each neuron in the brain releases the same chemical neurotransmitter, or combination of neurotransmitters, at all the synaptic connections it makes with other neurons; this rule is known as Dale's principle. Thus, a neuron can be characterized by the neurotransmitters that it releases. The great majority of psychoactive drugs exert their effects by altering specific neurotransmitter systems. This applies to drugs such as cannabinoids, nicotine, heroin, cocaine, alcohol, fluoxetine, chlorpromazine, and many others.
The two neurotransmitters that are most widely found in the vertebrate brain are glutamate, which almost always exerts excitatory effects on target neurons, and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), which is almost always inhibitory. Neurons using these transmitters can be found in nearly every part of the brain. Because of their ubiquity, drugs that act on glutamate or GABA tend to have broad and powerful effects. Some general anesthetics act by reducing the effects of glutamate; most tranquilizers exert their sedative effects by enhancing the effects of GABA.
There are dozens of other chemical neurotransmitters that are used in more limited areas of the brain, often areas dedicated to a particular function. Serotonin, for example—the primary target of many antidepressant drugs and many dietary aids—comes exclusively from a small brainstem area called the raphe nuclei. Norepinephrine, which is involved in arousal, comes exclusively from a nearby small area called the locus coeruleus. Other neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine and dopamine have multiple sources in the brain but are not as ubiquitously distributed as glutamate and GABA.
Electrical activity
As a side effect of the electrochemical processes used by neurons for signaling, brain tissue generates electric fields when it is active. When large numbers of neurons show synchronized activity, the electric fields that they generate can be large enough to detect outside the skull, using electroencephalography (EEG) or magnetoencephalography (MEG). EEG recordings, along with recordings made from electrodes implanted inside the brains of animals such as rats, show that the brain of a living animal is constantly active, even during sleep. Each part of the brain shows a mixture of rhythmic and nonrhythmic activity, which may vary according to behavioral state. In mammals, the cerebral cortex tends to show large slow delta waves during sleep, faster alpha waves when the animal is awake but inattentive, and chaotic-looking irregular activity when the animal is actively engaged in a task, called beta and gamma waves. During an epileptic seizure, the brain's inhibitory control mechanisms fail to function and electrical activity rises to pathological levels, producing EEG traces that show large wave and spike patterns not seen in a healthy brain. Relating these population-level patterns to the computational functions of individual neurons is a major focus of current research in neurophysiology.
Metabolism
All vertebrates have a blood–brain barrier that allows metabolism inside the brain to operate differently from metabolism in other parts of the body. The neurovascular unit regulates cerebral blood flow so that activated neurons can be supplied with energy. Glial cells play a major role in brain metabolism by controlling the chemical composition of the fluid that surrounds neurons, including levels of ions and nutrients.
Brain tissue consumes a large amount of energy in proportion to its volume, hence large brains place severe metabolic demands on animals. The need to limit body weight in order, for example, to fly, has apparently led to selection for a reduction of brain size in some species, such as bats. Most of the brain's energy consumption goes into sustaining the electric charge (membrane potential) of neurons. Most vertebrate species devote between 2% and 8% of basal metabolism to the brain. In primates, however, the percentage is much higher—in humans it rises to 20–25%. The energy consumption of the brain does not vary greatly over time, but active regions of the cerebral cortex consume somewhat more energy than inactive regions; this forms the basis for the functional brain imaging methods of PET, fMRI, and NIRS. The brain typically gets most of its energy from oxygen-dependent metabolism of glucose (i.e., blood sugar), but ketones provide a major alternative source, together with contributions from medium chain fatty acids (caprylic and heptanoic acids), lactate, acetate, and possibly amino acids.
Function
Information from the sense organs is collected in the brain. There it is used to determine what actions the organism is to take. The brain processes the raw data to extract information about the structure of the environment. Next it combines the processed information with information about the current needs of the animal and with memory of past circumstances. Finally, on the basis of the results, it generates motor response patterns. These signal-processing tasks require intricate interplay between a variety of functional subsystems.
The function of the brain is to provide coherent control over the actions of an animal. A centralized brain allows groups of muscles to be co-activated in complex patterns; it also allows stimuli impinging on one part of the body to evoke responses in other parts, and it can prevent different parts of the body from acting at cross-purposes to each other.
Perception
The human brain is provided with information about light, sound, the chemical composition of the atmosphere, temperature, the position of the body in space (proprioception), the chemical composition of the bloodstream, and more. In other animals additional senses are present, such as the infrared heat-sense of snakes, the magnetic field sense of some birds, or the electric field sense mainly seen in aquatic animals.
Each sensory system begins with specialized receptor cells, such as photoreceptor cells in the retina of the eye, or vibration-sensitive hair cells in the cochlea of the ear. The axons of sensory receptor cells travel into the spinal cord or brain, where they transmit their signals to a first-order sensory nucleus dedicated to one specific sensory modality. This primary sensory nucleus sends information to higher-order sensory areas that are dedicated to the same modality. Eventually, via a way-station in the thalamus, the signals are sent to the cerebral cortex, where they are processed to extract the relevant features, and integrated with signals coming from other sensory systems.
Motor control
Motor systems are areas of the brain that are involved in initiating body movements, that is, in activating muscles. Except for the muscles that control the eye, which are driven by nuclei in the midbrain, all the voluntary muscles in the body are directly innervated by motor neurons in the spinal cord and hindbrain. Spinal motor neurons are controlled both by neural circuits intrinsic to the spinal cord, and by inputs that descend from the brain. The intrinsic spinal circuits implement many reflex responses, and contain pattern generators for rhythmic movements such as walking or swimming. The descending connections from the brain allow for more sophisticated control.
The brain contains several motor areas that project directly to the spinal cord. At the lowest level are motor areas in the medulla and pons, which control stereotyped movements such as walking, breathing, or swallowing. At a higher level are areas in the midbrain, such as the red nucleus, which is responsible for coordinating movements of the arms and legs. At a higher level yet is the primary motor cortex, a strip of tissue located at the posterior edge of the frontal lobe. The primary motor cortex sends projections to the subcortical motor areas, but also sends a massive projection directly to the spinal cord, through the pyramidal tract. This direct corticospinal projection allows for precise voluntary control of the fine details of movements. Other motor-related brain areas exert secondary effects by projecting to the primary motor areas. Among the most important secondary areas are the premotor cortex, supplementary motor area, basal ganglia, and cerebellum. In addition to all of the above, the brain and spinal cord contain extensive circuitry to control the autonomic nervous system which controls the movement of the smooth muscle of the body.
Sleep
Many animals alternate between sleeping and waking in a daily cycle. Arousal and alertness are also modulated on a finer time scale by a network of brain areas. A key component of the sleep system is the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), a tiny part of the hypothalamus located directly above the point at which the optic nerves from the two eyes cross. The SCN contains the body's central biological clock. Neurons there show activity levels that rise and fall with a period of about 24 hours, circadian rhythms: these activity fluctuations are driven by rhythmic changes in expression of a set of "clock genes". The SCN continues to keep time even if it is excised from the brain and placed in a dish of warm nutrient solution, but it ordinarily receives input from the optic nerves, through the retinohypothalamic tract (RHT), that allows daily light-dark cycles to calibrate the clock.
The SCN projects to a set of areas in the hypothalamus, brainstem, and midbrain that are involved in implementing sleep-wake cycles. An important component of the system is the reticular formation, a group of neuron-clusters scattered diffusely through the core of the lower brain. Reticular neurons send signals to the thalamus, which in turn sends activity-level-controlling signals to every part of the cortex. Damage to the reticular formation can produce a permanent state of coma.
Sleep involves great changes in brain activity. Until the 1950s it was generally believed that the brain essentially shuts off during sleep, but this is now known to be far from true; activity continues, but patterns become very different. There are two types of sleep: REM sleep (with dreaming) and NREM (non-REM, usually without dreaming) sleep, which repeat in slightly varying patterns throughout a sleep episode. Three broad types of distinct brain activity patterns can be measured: REM, light NREM and deep NREM. During deep NREM sleep, also called slow wave sleep, activity in the cortex takes the form of large synchronized waves, whereas in the waking state it is noisy and desynchronized. Levels of the neurotransmitters norepinephrine and serotonin drop during slow wave sleep, and fall almost to zero during REM sleep; levels of acetylcholine show the reverse pattern.
Homeostasis
For any animal, survival requires maintaining a variety of parameters of bodily state within a limited range of variation: these include temperature, water content, salt concentration in the bloodstream, blood glucose levels, blood oxygen level, and others. The ability of an animal to regulate the internal environment of its body—the milieu intérieur, as the pioneering physiologist Claude Bernard called it—is known as homeostasis (Greek for "standing still"). Maintaining homeostasis is a crucial function of the brain. The basic principle that underlies homeostasis is negative feedback: any time a parameter diverges from its set-point, sensors generate an error signal that evokes a response that causes the parameter to shift back toward its optimum value. (This principle is widely used in engineering, for example in the control of temperature using a thermostat.)
In vertebrates, the part of the brain that plays the greatest role is the hypothalamus, a small region at the base of the forebrain whose size does not reflect its complexity or the importance of its function. The hypothalamus is a collection of small nuclei, most of which are involved in basic biological functions. Some of these functions relate to arousal or to social interactions such as sexuality, aggression, or maternal behaviors; but many of them relate to homeostasis. Several hypothalamic nuclei receive input from sensors located in the lining of blood vessels, conveying information about temperature, sodium level, glucose level, blood oxygen level, and other parameters. These hypothalamic nuclei send output signals to motor areas that can generate actions to rectify deficiencies. Some of the outputs also go to the pituitary gland, a tiny gland attached to the brain directly underneath the hypothalamus. The pituitary gland secretes hormones into the bloodstream, where they circulate throughout the body and induce changes in cellular activity.
Motivation
The individual animals need to express survival-promoting behaviors, such as seeking food, water, shelter, and a mate. The motivational system in the brain monitors the current state of satisfaction of these goals, and activates behaviors to meet any needs that arise. The motivational system works largely by a reward–punishment mechanism. When a particular behavior is followed by favorable consequences, the reward mechanism in the brain is activated, which induces structural changes inside the brain that cause the same behavior to be repeated later, whenever a similar situation arises. Conversely, when a behavior is followed by unfavorable consequences, the brain's punishment mechanism is activated, inducing structural changes that cause the behavior to be suppressed when similar situations arise in the future.
Most organisms studied to date use a reward–punishment mechanism: for instance, worms and insects can alter their behavior to seek food sources or to avoid dangers. In vertebrates, the reward-punishment system is implemented by a specific set of brain structures, at the heart of which lie the basal ganglia, a set of interconnected areas at the base of the forebrain. The basal ganglia are the central site at which decisions are made: the basal ganglia exert a sustained inhibitory control over most of the motor systems in the brain; when this inhibition is released, a motor system is permitted to execute the action it is programmed to carry out. Rewards and punishments function by altering the relationship between the inputs that the basal ganglia receive and the decision-signals that are emitted. The reward mechanism is better understood than the punishment mechanism, because its role in drug abuse has caused it to be studied very intensively. Research has shown that the neurotransmitter dopamine plays a central role: addictive drugs such as cocaine, amphetamine, and nicotine either cause dopamine levels to rise or cause the effects of dopamine inside the brain to be enhanced.
Learning and memory
Almost all animals are capable of modifying their behavior as a result of experience—even the most primitive types of worms. Because behavior is driven by brain activity, changes in behavior must somehow correspond to changes inside the brain. Already in the late 19th century theorists like Santiago Ramón y Cajal argued that the most plausible explanation is that learning and memory are expressed as changes in the synaptic connections between neurons. Until 1970, however, experimental evidence to support the synaptic plasticity hypothesis was lacking. In 1971 Tim Bliss and Terje Lømo published a paper on a phenomenon now called long-term potentiation: the paper showed clear evidence of activity-induced synaptic changes that lasted for at least several days. Since then technical advances have made these sorts of experiments much easier to carry out, and thousands of studies have been made that have clarified the mechanism of synaptic change, and uncovered other types of activity-driven synaptic change in a variety of brain areas, including the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, basal ganglia, and cerebellum. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and physical activity appear to play a beneficial role in the process.
Neuroscientists currently distinguish several types of learning and memory that are implemented by the brain in distinct ways:

Working memory is the ability of the brain to maintain a temporary representation of information about the task that an animal is currently engaged in. This sort of dynamic memory is thought to be mediated by the formation of cell assemblies—groups of activated neurons that maintain their activity by constantly stimulating one another.
Episodic memory is the ability to remember the details of specific events. This sort of memory can last for a lifetime. Much evidence implicates the hippocampus in playing a crucial role: people with severe damage to the hippocampus sometimes show amnesia, that is, inability to form new long-lasting episodic memories.
Semantic memory is the ability to learn facts and relationships. This sort of memory is probably stored largely in the cerebral cortex, mediated by changes in connections between cells that represent specific types of information.
Instrumental learning is the ability for rewards and punishments to modify behavior. It is implemented by a network of brain areas centered on the basal ganglia.
Motor learning is the ability to refine patterns of body movement by practicing, or more generally by repetition. A number of brain areas are involved, including the premotor cortex, basal ganglia, and especially the cerebellum, which functions as a large memory bank for microadjustments of the parameters of movement.
Research
The field of neuroscience encompasses all approaches that seek to understand the brain and the rest of the nervous system. Psychology seeks to understand mind and behavior, and neurology is the medical discipline that diagnoses and treats diseases of the nervous system. The brain is also the most important organ studied in psychiatry, the branch of medicine that works to study, prevent, and treat mental disorders. Cognitive science seeks to unify neuroscience and psychology with other fields that concern themselves with the brain, such as computer science (artificial intelligence and similar fields) and philosophy.
The oldest method of studying the brain is anatomical, and until the middle of the 20th century, much of the progress in neuroscience came from the development of better cell stains and better microscopes. Neuroanatomists study the large-scale structure of the brain as well as the microscopic structure of neurons and their components, especially synapses. Among other tools, they employ a plethora of stains that reveal neural structure, chemistry, and connectivity. In recent years, the development of immunostaining techniques has allowed investigation of neurons that express specific sets of genes. Also, functional neuroanatomy uses medical imaging techniques to correlate variations in human brain structure with differences in cognition or behavior.
Neurophysiologists study the chemical, pharmacological, and electrical properties of the brain: their primary tools are drugs and recording devices. Thousands of experimentally developed drugs affect the nervous system, some in highly specific ways. Recordings of brain activity can be made using electrodes, either glued to the scalp as in EEG studies, or implanted inside the brains of animals for extracellular recordings, which can detect action potentials generated by individual neurons. Because the brain does not contain pain receptors, it is possible using these techniques to record brain activity from animals that are awake and behaving without causing distress. The same techniques have occasionally been used to study brain activity in human patients with intractable epilepsy, in cases where there was a medical necessity to implant electrodes to localize the brain area responsible for epileptic seizures. Functional imaging techniques such as fMRI are also used to study brain activity; these techniques have mainly been used with human subjects, because they require a conscious subject to remain motionless for long periods of time, but they have the great advantage of being noninvasive.

Another approach to brain function is to examine the consequences of damage to specific brain areas. Even though it is protected by the skull and meninges, surrounded by cerebrospinal fluid, and isolated from the bloodstream by the blood–brain barrier, the delicate nature of the brain makes it vulnerable to numerous diseases and several types of damage. In humans, the effects of strokes and other types of brain damage have been a key source of information about brain function. Because there is no ability to experimentally control the nature of the damage, however, this information is often difficult to interpret. In animal studies, most commonly involving rats, it is possible to use electrodes or locally injected chemicals to produce precise patterns of damage and then examine the consequences for behavior.
Computational neuroscience encompasses two approaches: first, the use of computers to study the brain; second, the study of how brains perform computation. On one hand, it is possible to write a computer program to simulate the operation of a group of neurons by making use of systems of equations that describe their electrochemical activity; such simulations are known as biologically realistic neural networks. On the other hand, it is possible to study algorithms for neural computation by simulating, or mathematically analyzing, the operations of simplified "units" that have some of the properties of neurons but abstract out much of their biological complexity. The computational functions of the brain are studied both by computer scientists and neuroscientists.
Computational neurogenetic modeling is concerned with the study and development of dynamic neuronal models for modeling brain functions with respect to genes and dynamic interactions between genes.
Recent years have seen increasing applications of genetic and genomic techniques to the study of the brain and a focus on the roles of neurotrophic factors and physical activity in neuroplasticity. The most common subjects are mice, because of the availability of technical tools. It is now possible with relative ease to "knock out" or mutate a wide variety of genes, and then examine the effects on brain function. More sophisticated approaches are also being used: for example, using Cre-Lox recombination it is possible to activate or deactivate genes in specific parts of the brain, at specific times.
Recent years have also seen rapid advances in single-cell sequencing technologies, and these have been used to leverage the cellular heterogeneity of the brain as a means of better understanding the roles of distinct cell types in disease and biology (as well as how genomic variants influence individual cell types). In 2024, investigators studied a large integrated dataset of almost 3 million nuclei from the human prefrontal cortext from 388 individuals. In doing so, they annotated 28 cell types to evaluate expression and chromatin variation across gene families and drug targets. They identified about half a million cell type–specific regulatory elements and about 1.5 million single-cell expression quantitative trait loci (i.e., genomic variants with strong statistical associations with changes in gene expression within specific cell types), which were then used to build cell-type regulatory networks (the study also describes cell-to-cell communication networks). These networks were found to manifest cellular changes in aging and neuropsychiatric disorders. As part of the same investigation, a machine learning model was designed to accurately impute single-cell expression (this model prioritized ~250 disease-risk genes and drug targets with associated cell types).
History
The oldest brain to have been discovered was in Armenia in the Areni-1 cave complex. The brain, estimated to be over 5,000 years old, was found in the skull of a 12 to 14-year-old girl. Although the brains were shriveled, they were well preserved due to the climate found inside the cave.
Early philosophers were divided as to whether the seat of the soul lies in the brain or heart. Aristotle favored the heart, and thought that the function of the brain was merely to cool the blood. The Greek physician Alcmaeon of Croton in the fifth century BCE was the first to argue that the brain, not the heart, is the seat of the mind — the position now called the cephalocentric hypothesis. Democritus, the inventor of the atomic theory of matter, argued for a three-part soul, with intellect in the head, emotion in the heart, and lust near the liver. The unknown author of On the Sacred Disease, a medical treatise in the Hippocratic Corpus, came down unequivocally in favor of the brain, writing:

Men ought to know that from nothing else but the brain come joys, delights, laughter and sports, and sorrows, griefs, despondency, and lamentations. ... And by the same organ we become mad and delirious, and fears and terrors assail us, some by night, and some by day, and dreams and untimely wanderings, and cares that are not suitable, and ignorance of present circumstances, desuetude, and unskillfulness. All these things we endure from the brain, when it is not healthy...

The Roman physician Galen also argued for the importance of the brain, and theorized in some depth about how it might work. Galen was the first scientist and philosopher to assign specific parts of the soul to locations in the body because of his extensive background in medicine, an experimental defence of the cephalocentric hypothesis against Stoic cardiocentrism. Galen traced out the anatomical relationships among brain, nerves, and muscles, demonstrating that all muscles in the body are connected to the brain through a branching network of nerves. He postulated that nerves activate muscles mechanically by carrying a mysterious substance he called pneumata psychikon, usually translated as "animal spirits". Galen's ideas were widely known during the Middle Ages, but not much further progress came until the Renaissance, when detailed anatomical study resumed, combined with the theoretical speculations of René Descartes and those who followed him. Descartes, like Galen, thought of the nervous system in hydraulic terms. He believed that the highest cognitive functions are carried out by a non-physical res cogitans, but that the majority of behaviors of humans, and all behaviors of animals, could be explained mechanistically.
The first real progress toward a modern understanding of nervous function, though, came from the investigations of Luigi Galvani (1737–1798), who discovered that a shock of static electricity applied to an exposed nerve of a dead frog could cause its leg to contract. Since that time, each major advance in understanding has followed more or less directly from the development of a new technique of investigation. Until the early years of the 20th century, the most important advances were derived from new methods for staining cells. Particularly critical was the invention of the Golgi stain, which (when correctly used) stains only a small fraction of neurons, but stains them in their entirety, including cell body, dendrites, and axon. Without such a stain, brain tissue under a microscope appears as an impenetrable tangle of protoplasmic fibers, in which it is impossible to determine any structure. In the hands of Camillo Golgi, and especially of the Spanish neuroanatomist Santiago Ramón y Cajal, the new stain revealed hundreds of distinct types of neurons, each with its own unique dendritic structure and pattern of connectivity.

In the first half of the 20th century, advances in electronics enabled investigation of the electrical properties of nerve cells, culminating in work by Alan Hodgkin, Andrew Huxley, and others on the biophysics of the action potential, and the work of Bernard Katz and others on the electrochemistry of the synapse. These studies complemented the anatomical picture with a conception of the brain as a dynamic entity. Reflecting the new understanding, in 1942 Charles Sherrington visualized the workings of the brain waking from sleep:

The great topmost sheet of the mass, that where hardly a light had twinkled or moved, becomes now a sparkling field of rhythmic flashing points with trains of traveling sparks hurrying hither and thither. The brain is waking and with it the mind is returning. It is as if the Milky Way entered upon some cosmic dance. Swiftly the head mass becomes an enchanted loom where millions of flashing shuttles weave a dissolving pattern, always a meaningful pattern though never an abiding one; a shifting harmony of subpatterns.
The invention of electronic computers in the 1940s, along with the development of mathematical information theory, led to a realization that brains can potentially be understood as information processing systems. This concept formed the basis of the field of cybernetics, and eventually gave rise to the field now known as computational neuroscience. The earliest attempts at cybernetics were somewhat crude in that they treated the brain as essentially a digital computer in disguise, as for example in John von Neumann's 1958 book, The Computer and the Brain. Over the years, though, accumulating information about the electrical responses of brain cells recorded from behaving animals has steadily moved theoretical concepts in the direction of increasing realism.
One of the most influential early contributions was a 1959 paper titled What the frog's eye tells the frog's brain: the paper examined the visual responses of neurons in the retina and optic tectum of frogs, and came to the conclusion that some neurons in the tectum of the frog are wired to combine elementary responses in a way that makes them function as "bug perceivers". A few years later David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel discovered cells in the primary visual cortex of monkeys that become active when sharp edges move across specific points in the field of view—a discovery for which they won a Nobel Prize. Follow-up studies in higher-order visual areas found cells that detect binocular disparity, color, movement, and aspects of shape, with areas located at increasing distances from the primary visual cortex showing increasingly complex responses. Other investigations of brain areas unrelated to vision have revealed cells with a wide variety of response correlates, some related to memory, some to abstract types of cognition such as space.
Theorists have worked to understand these response patterns by constructing mathematical models of neurons and neural networks, which can be simulated using computers. Some useful models are abstract, focusing on the conceptual structure of neural algorithms rather than the details of how they are implemented in the brain; other models attempt to incorporate data about the biophysical properties of real neurons. No model on any level is yet considered to be a fully valid description of brain function, though. The essential difficulty is that sophisticated computation by neural networks requires distributed processing in which hundreds or thousands of neurons work cooperatively—current methods of brain activity recording are only capable of isolating action potentials from a few dozen neurons at a time.
Furthermore, even single neurons appear to be complex and capable of performing computations. So, brain models that do not reflect this are too abstract to be representative of brain operation; models that do try to capture this are very computationally expensive and arguably intractable with present computational resources. However, the Human Brain Project is trying to build a realistic, detailed computational model of the entire human brain. The wisdom of this approach has been publicly contested, with high-profile scientists on both sides of the argument.
In the second half of the 20th century, developments in chemistry, electron microscopy, genetics, computer science, functional brain imaging, and other fields progressively opened new windows into brain structure and function. In the United States, the 1990s were officially designated as the "Decade of the Brain" to commemorate advances made in brain research, and to promote funding for such research.
In the 21st century, these trends have continued, and several new approaches have come into prominence, including multielectrode recording, which allows the activity of many brain cells to be recorded all at the same time; genetic engineering, which allows molecular components of the brain to be altered experimentally; genomics, which allows variations in brain structure to be correlated with variations in DNA properties and neuroimaging.
Society and cultureAs food
Animal brains are used as food in numerous cuisines.
In rituals
Some archaeological evidence suggests that the mourning rituals of European Neanderthals also involved the consumption of the brain.
The Fore people of Papua New Guinea are known to eat human brains. In funerary rituals, those close to the dead would eat the brain of the deceased to create a sense of immortality. A prion disease called kuru has been traced to this.


The Mammal Society is a British charity devoted to the research and conservation of British mammals.
The Mammal Society was formed in 1954, and the inaugural spring conference took place the following year at The University of Exeter.
The Mammal Society has a membership of around 2000 mammalogists, ecologists, conservationists, both experts and enthusiasts, all working to develop greater understanding of mammals and the conservation challenges they face. The Society runs national surveys for mammals, for example Mini Mammal Monitoring.
The Mammal Society is also working to address the problem that mammals in the British Isles are severely under-recorded, resulting in a lack of mammal conservation progress. The Mammal Society is determined to overcome this by creating a National Mammal Atlas to provide vital information on mammal distribution and abundance so that informed conservation decisions can be made for species in need. In order to achieve this they are collating national mammal data and records to gather up to date information.
The Mammal Society offers a wide range of expert-led training courses for consultants, conservationists and enthusiasts alike, covering ecology, technical skills and surveying.
The Society's president is Penny Lewns, and its current Chair is Dr Stephanie Wray.
Publications
The Mammal Society publishes a number of informative books for conservationists, enthusiasts and consultants alike, as well as a high impact scientific journal, Mammal Review.
In June 2012, The Mammal Society published UK BAP Mammals: Interim Guidelines for Survey Methodologies, Impact Assessment & Mitigation  for species for which there was previously no available guidance.
The 4th edition of Mammals of the British Isles: Handbook is a reference work published by the Mammal Society covering the biology, ecology and conservation of every mammal species occurring in Britain and Ireland. The 3rd edition had been published in 1991 and was subsequently out of print. More than 100 contributors, mostly members of the Mammal Society, worked on the 800-page 4th edition, which was published in 2008. It includes species accounts summarizing the ecology, biology and conservation status of each mammal found in or around the British Isles.


Kapi is an extinct primate genus that lived in northern India about 13.8 to 12.5 million years ago during the Miocene. The only species, K. ramnagarensis, was described in 2020 and is known from a complete lower molar. The fossil was discovered in 2015 from Ramnagar, a town in Jammu and Kashmir, for which the species name was created. Though originally identified as member of the gibbons and popularised in the news as the oldest gibbon, it was later reassessed as a pliopithecoid, a group of extinct Old World monkeys.
Discovery
American palaeontologists led by Christopher Gilbert, from the Hunter College of the City University of New York and the American Museum of Natural History, and Indian scientists, Ningthoujam Premjit Singh and Rajeev Patnaik, both from Panjab University, explored the Lower Siwaliks of Ramnagar in Jammu and Kashmir since 2010. A number of animal fossils were collected but the most important was a lower jaw bone (mandible) with three molar teeth attached to it which was found in 2014. The fossil was identified as that of a hitherto primate and was named in 2017 as Ramadapis sahnii.
The team took further exploration of the same area in 2015. One day, as the team took rest, Gilbert noticed a shiny object among a pile of dirt on the ground. As he dug up, the object was a molar tooth, as he reported, "We knew immediately it was a primate tooth, but it did not look like the tooth of any of the primates previously found in the area." However, the identification was difficult and only after five years, they were able to identify it as belonging to extinct gibbons. They reported the discovery in the Proceedings of the Royal Society B on 8 September 2020.
Etymology
The generic name Kapi is from the Hindi term for a monkey or ape. The specific name is after Ramnagar, where the type specimen was found.
Features
Kapi is known only from a single tooth. The specimen is a right lower third molar. It shows low crown and generally smaller and narrower than those of other gibbons. The tooth structure indicates that it was a fruit-eating primate.
Reassessment
The original report concluded that "if one considersYuanmoupithecus a stem hylobatid, Kapi is equally if not more likely to be one as well, making it the earliest known hylobatid in the fossil record." Yuanmoupithecus is a gibbon fossil discovered from China in 2006, dated to 6 to 8 million years old. Better fossils were later discovered and reanalysed in 2022 which supported reclassification of Kapi as a pliopithecoid.


Mammal Species of the World: A Taxonomic and Geographic Reference (MSW) is a standard reference work in mammalogy giving descriptions and bibliographic data for the known species of mammals. It is now in its third edition, published in late 2005, which was edited by Don E. Wilson and DeeAnn M. Reeder. An online version is hosted by Bucknell University (see "External links" below).
The Checklist Committee of the American Society of Mammalogists was charged with compiling and updating MSW. In its Annual Report for 2015, the Committee noted that it is under contract with Johns Hopkins Press for the 4th edition of MSW, which will be edited by DeeAnn M. Reeder and Kristofer M. Helgen. The database was made editable for the authors, with the intention of more frequent website updates. The 4th edition was initially expected to be published in 2017, and then deferred until 2019, which had yet to be published as of 2025. The Checklist Committee has since been repurposed into the Biodiversity Committee, which in 2018 released and now maintains the Mammal Diversity Database.


This list of introduced mammal species includes all the species of mammal introduced to an area without regard to that territory being or not being their native area of occupation or the success of that re-introduction or introduction to the area. This practice has been harmful in many areas, although some introductions are made with the aim of preserving mammal species. Following the name of the mammal, a brief description of where they were introduced is included.
Marsupials
Bennett's wallaby successfully introduced to Europe and New Zealand
Brush-tailed possum successfully introduced to New Zealand
Brush-tailed rock wallaby unsuccessfully introduced to New Zealand (exterminated by 2014) but was successfully introduced to Hawaii
Koala successfully introduced to South Australia
Parma wallaby (Macropus parma) successfully introduced to New Zealand
Swamp wallaby (Wallabia bicolor) successfully introduced to New Zealand
Tammar wallaby successfully introduced to New Zealand
Virginia opossum (Didelphis virginiana) successfully introduced to California and unsuccessfully introduced to British Isles (no wild population exists)
Horses
Feral donkey successfully introduced to Australia, Africa, USA, Cyprus, New Zealand, Central America, Sri Lanka, Oceania
Feral horse successfully introduced to USA, Australia, New Zealand, Africa, British isles, Central America, and South America
Plains zebra successfully introduced to USA
Antelopes
Blackbuck successfully introduced to USA and South America
Black wildebeest (Connochaetes gnou) successfully introduced to Namibia
Gemsbok successfully introduced to USA
Impala (Aepyceros melampus) successfully introduced to Gabon
Nilgai successfully introduced to USA and Mexico
Nyala (Tragelaphus angasii) successfully introduced to Botswana and Namibia
Sable antelope (Hippotragus niger) successfully introduced to Swaziland
Pigs
Wild boar successfully introduced to USA, Hawaii, Australia, Africa, South America, New Zealand, Central America, Asia, and Oceania
Cattle and other bovines
American bison (Bison bison) successfully introduced to California
Banteng successfully introduced to Australia
Domestic cattle successfully introduced worldwide
European bison (Bison bonasus) successfully reintroduced to Europe
Greenland muskox (Ovibox moschatus) successfully introduced to Scandinavia and Russia
Water buffalo successfully introduced to Australia, Brazil, and Oceania
Zebu successfully introduced to Africa - considered to be a breed of domestic cattle
Camels
Dromedary camel successfully introduced to Europe (no wild population exists), Asia (all wild populations exist within the natural range), and Australia, and unsuccessfully introduced to USA (due to the Civil War but captive only)
Bactrian camel successfully introduced to Europe (no wild population exists)
Sheep and Goats
Barbary sheep successfully introduced to New Mexico, Europe, Mexico, and Canary Islands
Chamois successfully introduced to New Zealand
Feral goat/Wild goat successfully introduced to Australia, New Zealand, Hawaii, Africa, North America, British isles, South America, Europe, Asia, and Oceania
Feral sheep successfully introduced to USA, New Zealand, Tibet, and Oceania
Himalayan tahr successfully introduced to USA, South America, New Zealand, and Africa
Mouflon successfully introduced to USA, mainland Europe, South America (on private estates), Hawaii, and Canary Islands
Hippos
Hippopotamus successfully introduced to Colombia following Pablo Escobar's death and subsequent closure of his private zoo in 1993.
Deer
Moose introduced to Newfoundland, possibly successfully introduced to New Zealand (no wild population exists but captive only)
White-tailed deer successfully introduced to New Zealand, Cuba, Jamaica, Hispaniola, Puerto Rico, Bahamas, Lesser Antilles, Finland, Czech Republic and Serbia
Mule deer unsuccessfully introduced to Argentina and Hawaii
American elk successfully introduced to Florida, New Zealand, South America, and Italy
Chital deer successfully introduced to Hawaii, Australia, Chile, Argentina, Texas, Florida, Mississippi, California, Alabama, and Europe
Fallow deer successfully introduced to Australia, New Zealand, British Isles, North America, Caribbean Islands, South America, and Africa
Sika deer successfully introduced to Europe, British Isles, Africa (captive only), North America, South America (captive only), and New Zealand
Red deer successfully introduced to North America, Australia, New Zealand, South America, and Africa
Chinese water deer successfully introduced to British Isles and France
Reeve's muntjac successfully introduced to British Isles and Asia
Indian hog deer unsuccessfully introduced to USA and Australia
Swamp deer successfully introduced to Texas (captive only)
Rangifer tarandus (reindeer) successfully introduced to Iceland, South Georgia, and  Ile Australia
Rusa marianna (Philippine deer) successfully introduced to Guam, Rota, Pohnpei and Saipan
Rusa timorensis (Javan rusa) successfully introduced to Australia, New Zealand, and Africa
Rusa unicolor (sambar deer) successfully introduced to Australia, New Zealand, and North America
Mongooses and relatives
Common genet successfully introduced to Europe and unsuccessfully introduced to most of Egypt
Small Asian mongoose successfully introduced to Hawaii, Venezuela, Guyana, Suriname, mainland Europe, Caribbean Islands, Japan, Mauritius, and Fiji and unsuccessfully introduced to British Isles (no wild population exists)
Yellow mongoose successfully introduced to Namibia and South Africa, but not outside of its natural range
Egyptian mongoose successfully introduced to Europe
Paguma larvata (masked palm civet) successfully introduced to Japan
Viverricula indica (small Indian civet) successfully introduced to Madagascar
Cats
Feral cat successfully introduced to worldwide, including New Zealand, Hawaii, and others
Puma yagouaroundi (jaguarundi) successfully introduced to Florida
Dogs
Feral dog successfully introduced to worldwide
Red fox successfully introduced to worldwide, including Australia
Raccoon dog successfully introduced to Europe and Asia
Canis latrans (coyote) successfully introduced to Florida and Georgia
Mustelids
American mink successfully introduced to Asia and the British Isles, South America, and Europe
Ferret successfully introduced to the British Isles, New Zealand, and Azores
Stoat successfully introduced to New Zealand
Martes melampus (Japanese marten) successfully introduced to Asia
Mustela itatsi (Japanese weasel) successfully introduced to Asia
Mustela nivalis (least weasel) successfully introduced to New Zealand
Mustela sibirica (Siberian weasel) successfully introduced to Asia
Raccoons and relatives
South American coati unsuccessfully introduced to Europe
Nasua narica (white-nosed coati) successfully introduced to Florida
Common raccoon successfully introduced to Japan, Europe, Prince Edward Island, and Caribbean Islands
Insectivores
Asian house shrew successfully introduced to Africa and Oceania
Atelerix algirus (north African hedgehog) successfully introduced to Europe
Crocidura russula (greater white-toothed shrew) successfully introduced to British isles
Erinaceus amurensis (Amur hedgehog) successfully introduced to Japan
Erinaceus europaeus (European hedgehog) successfully introduced to British isles and New Zealand
Monkeys
Barbary macaque successfully introduced to Europe
Rhesus macaque successfully introduced to Florida, South Carolina, the Caribbean islands, and Japan
Japanese macaque unsuccessfully introduced to Texas
Wedge-capped capuchin introduced to Trinidad & Tobago
Brown capuchin introduced to Trinidad and Tobago
Vervet monkey successfully introduced to USA Florida
Patas monkey successfully introduced to Australia (captive only) and Puerto Rico
Common squirrel monkey successfully introduced to Florida
Crab-eating macaque successfully introduced to Africa, Hong Kong, and Oceania
Cercopithecus mona (mona monkey) successfully introduced to Grenada and São Tomé and Príncipe
Chlorocebus sabaeus (green monkey) successfully introduced to Central America
Macaca arctoides (stump-tailed macaque) successfully introduced to Mexico
Macaca cyclopis (Formosan rock macaque) successfully introduced to Japan
Rodents
Capybara successfully introduced to Florida
Gambian pouch rat successfully introduced to Florida's islands, Gulf coast of USA, and Central America (captive only), and unsuccessfully introduced to mainland Florida
Pacific rat successfully introduced to New Zealand and Hawaii
Black rat successfully introduced to worldwide
Brown rat successfully introduced to worldwide
House mouse successfully introduced to worldwide
Coypu successfully introduced to most of USA, Asia, Europe, and Africa and unsuccessfully introduced to California. Eradicated from UK.
Muskrat successfully introduced to Asia, Europe, and South America. Eradicated from UK.
Bank vole successfully introduced to British Isles
Edible dormouse successfully introduced to British Isles
Siberian chipmunk successfully introduced to Europe and Asia
Grey squirrel successfully introduced to Europe, British Isles, Africa, and Pitcairn Islands
Callosciurus finlaysonii (Finlayson's squirrel) successfully introduced to Europe and Japan
Callosciurus erythraeus (Pallas's squirrel) successfully introduced to Europe and Japan
Funambulus pennantii (northern palm squirrel) successfully introduced to Australia
Sciurus aberti (Abert's squirrel) successfully introduced to non-native areas of Arizona
Sciurus aureogaster (Mexican red-bellied squirrel) successfully introduced to Florida
Sciurus niger (fox squirrel) successfully introduced to western US
Spermophilus parryii (Arctic ground squirrel) successfully introduced to Alaskan islands
North American beaver successfully introduced to South America and Europe
Castor fiber (European beaver) successfully reintroduced to Finland
African porcupine successfully introduced to Europe (within natural range) and British Isles (captive only)
Himalayan porcupine unsuccessfully introduced to British Isles (captive only)
Rabbits and Hares
Mountain hare successfully introduced to New Zealand, Scandinavia, and Réunion
European rabbit successfully introduced to Australia, North America, Africa, Asia, New Zealand, British isles, South America, and Oceania
European hare successfully introduced to Australia, British Isles, New Zealand, North America, and South America
Lepus nigricollis (Indian hare) successfully introduced to Africa
Sylvilagus floridanus (cottontail rabbit) successfully introduced to Europe


In terrestrial animals, plantigrade locomotion means walking with the toes and metatarsals flat on the ground. It is one of three forms of locomotion adopted by terrestrial mammals. The other options are digitigrade, walking on the toes and fingers with the heel and wrist permanently raised, and unguligrade,  walking on the nail or nails of the toes (the hoof) with the heel/wrist and the digits permanently raised. The leg of a plantigrade mammal includes the bones of the upper leg (femur/humerus) and lower leg (tibia and fibula/radius and ulna). The leg of a digitigrade mammal also includes the metatarsals/metacarpals, the bones that in a human compose the arch of the foot and the palm of the hand. The leg of an unguligrade mammal also includes the phalanges, the finger and toe bones.

Among extinct animals, most early mammals such as pantodonts were plantigrade. A plantigrade foot is the primitive condition for mammals; digitigrade and unguligrade locomotion evolved later. Among archosaurs, the pterosaurs were partially plantigrade and walked on the whole of the hind foot and the fingers of the hand-wing. Out of the plantigrade animals, only a few, such as humans, kangaroos and certain rodents, are obligate bipeds, while most others are functional bipeds.
List of plantigrade animals
Plantigrade animals species include (but are not limited to):

Mammals
Several primates (including humans and lemurs)
Carnivora:
Ursidae: bears (with the exception of the hemicyonines)
amphicyonids
Musteloidea: skunks, raccoons, weasels, badgers, otters, and red pandas
Nimravids: false saber-tooth cats
Oxyaenids
Rodents: mice, rats, porcupines
Hedgehogs
Hyraxes
Marsupialia:  kangaroos, opossums
Nearly all basal mammals and non-mammalian synapsids were plantigrade
Birds
Loons, grebes, penguins, some auks, and most petrels (except for albatrosses and giant petrels)
Reptiles
Nearly all reptiles (including pterosaurs but excluding dinosaurs (including most birds), which are digitigrade or semi-digitigrade) are plantigrade
Amphibians
All amphibians are plantigrade
Evolution
The primary advantages of a plantigrade foot are stability and weight-bearing ability; plantigrade feet have the largest surface area. The primary disadvantage of a plantigrade foot is speed. With more bones and joints in the foot, the leg is both shorter and heavier at the far end, which makes it difficult to move rapidly.
In humans and other great apes, another possible advantage of a plantigrade foot is that it may enhance fighting performance by providing a more powerful stance for striking and grappling.
Plantigrade foot occurs normally in humans in static postures of standing and sitting. It should also occur normally in gait (walking). Hypertonicity, spasticity, clonus, limited range of motion, abnormal flexion neural pattern, and a plantar flexor (calf) muscle contracture, as well as some forms of footwear such as high heeled shoes may contribute to an individual only standing and/or walking on their toes. It would be evident by the observable heel rise.


In paleontology, biochronology is the correlation in time of biological events using fossils. In its strict sense, it refers to the use of assemblages of fossils that are not tied to stratigraphic sections (in contrast to biostratigraphy, where they are). Collections of land mammal ages have been defined for every continent except Antarctica, and most are correlated with each other indirectly through known evolutionary lineages. A combination of argon–argon dating and magnetic stratigraphy allows a direct temporal comparison of terrestrial events with climate variations and mass extinctions.
Comparison with biostratigraphy
In sedimentary rocks, fossils are the only widely applicable tool for time correlation. Evolution leaves a record of change, sequential and nonrepeating. A rock unit has a characteristic assemblage of fossils, independent of its lithology. Thus, the fossils can be used to compare the ages of different rock units.
The basic unit of biochronology is the biostratigraphic zone, or biozone, a collection of fossils found together in a rock unit. This is used as the basis of a biochron, "a unit of time in which an association of taxa is interpreted to have lived." However, a biozone may vary in age from one location or another. For example, a given taxon may migrate, so its first appearance varies from place to place. In particular, facies-controlled organisms (organisms that lived in a particular sedimentary environment) are not well suited for biochronology because they move with their environment and may change little over long periods of time. Thus, biostratigraphers search for species that are particularly widespread, abundant, and not tied to particular sedimentary environments. This is particularly true of free-swimming animals such as benthic foraminifera, which readily spread throughout the world's oceans.
Another challenge for stratigraphy is that there are often large gaps in the fossil record at a given location. To counter this, biostratigraphers search for a particularly well-preserved section that can be used as the type section for a particular biostratographic unit. As an example, the boundary between the Silurian and Devonian periods is marked by the first appearance of the graptolite Mongraptus uniformus uniformus in a section in Klonk, Czech Republic.
In terrestrial deposits, fossils of land mammals and other vertebrates are used as stratigraphic tools, but they have some disadvantages relative to marine fossils. They are seldom evenly distributed through a section, and they tend to occur in isolated pockets with few overlaps between biozones. Thus, correlations between biozones is often indirect, inferred using a knowledge of their sequence of evolution. This practice was first proposed by H. S. Williams in 1941.
In the United States, biochronology is widely used as a synonym for biostratigraphy, but in Canada and Europe the term is reserved for biochronology that is not tied to a particular stratigraphic section. This form of biochronology is not recognized by the International Stratigraphic Guide, but it is "really what a great many paleontologists and stratigraphers are after ... an optimum network of fossil correlations, thought to embody a reliable and high-resolution isochronous time (lines) framework."
Land mammal ages
A Cenozoic chronology based on mammal taxa has been defined on all the continents except Antarctica. Because the continents have been separated through most of the Cenozoic, each continent has its own system. Most of the units are based on assemblage zones, layers of strata that contain three or more distinctive fossils.
North America
In 1941, a committee chaired by Horace E. Wood II compiled a list of 19 "provincial ages" for North America, later called North American Land Mammal Ages (NMLAs). An example of an NMLA is the Rancholabrean, named after the Rancho La Brea fossil site. One of its characteristic fossils is the bison, which first appears in the Rancholabrean. The committee tried to make the definitions unambiguous by providing multiple criteria such as index fossils, first and last occurrences, and the relation to a particular formation. Some of these criteria have turned out to be inconsistent, leading to conflict. For example, the Chadronian Land Mammal Age in the late Eocene was defined by the boundaries of the Chadron Formation in Nebraska as well as the co-occurrence of Mesohippus, an early horse, and titanotheres, a family of rhinoceros-like animals. Titanotheres have since been found above the Chadron Formation, leaving the definition of the age uncertain. Since NAMLs are not tied to stratigraphic sections, they are not true chronostratigraphic stages, so some authors place quotes around "Ages".
South America
The development of  South American land mammal ages is largely due to two brothers, Florentino Ameghino and Carlos Ameghino. As of 1983, there were 19 ages, all but one of which were based on sections in Argentina. Since then three more ages have been added for the Paleocene.
Europe
The first European European land mammal age (ELMA), the Villafranchian, was defined in 1865. It was based on sedimentary units near Villafranca d'Asti in Italy. Several more were proposed between 1950 and 1975; and in 1975 Mein introduced a finer division called Mammal Neogene (MN) zones. A total of 30 Mammal Paleogene zones have also been defined.
Asia
Asian land mammal ages are more recently named and more tentative than the ages for the above continents, with poor geochronological constraints. There is no consensus for the names of some of the ages. However, the picture is rapidly improving, since Central Asia has some of the world's best records of Neogene mammals.
Africa
African land mammal ages were formally defined in 2020. Previously, sequences of fossils (including those of primates) were only informally designated.
Other tetrapod-based biochronologies
Land-mammal ages mostly represent intervals in the Cenozoic; they have not been proposed for the Mesozoic. However, related systems have been proposed for other periods of prehistory. Land-vertebrate "ages" (LVAs) based primarily on dinosaur faunas have been proposed for the late Cretaceous in western North America.
Land vertebrate faunachrons
The most widely utilized pre-Cenozoic tetrapod biochronology system involves Land vertebrate faunachrons (LVFs). The LVF system was originally designed by Spencer G. Lucas to correlate terrestrial faunal assemblages of the Triassic period. LVFs have also been used in Permian biochronology. Although LVFs are a common method used to date Triassic terrestrial sediments, their reliability is more heavily debated than that of Land Mammal Ages.
Geochronology
The order of evolutionary events that have been used to sequence land mammal records have been verified using geochronological methods. Although first and last occurrences of taxa can vary with location, assemblages show little variation. Fossils of mammals also have the advantage that the mammals have evolved rapidly.
The resolution of terrestrial fossil records have improved as the methods have improved. Although K–Ar dating has largely yielded correct results, some needed revision after the advent of  Argon–argon dating.  Magnetic stratigraphy allows synchronization with the global magnetic polarity record resulting from reversals of the Earth's magnetic field. This has made it possible to correlate terrestrial sediments with the time scale from marine sediments, and compare them directly with global climate change and mass extinctions.
Paleontologists have moved towards finer zonation of terrestrial fossils, with the potential to divide the Cenozoic into time intervals of 300,000 years or less. They have also attempted to convert some of the intervals, including the Wasatchian age/stage and Clarkforkian age/stage, into biostratigraphic units. However, the fossil record remains discontinuous even in North America, and Woodburne speculates that "mammal age correlations provide results that are satisfactory to their users."


The Mammals of Australia is a three-volume work written and published by John Gould between 1845–63. It contains 182 illustrations by the author and its artist H. C. Richter. It was intended to be a complete survey of the novel species of mammals, such as the marsupials, discovered in the colonies of Australia.
Author
The author, John Gould, best known for The Birds of Australia and other major works of ornithology, visited Australia in 1838. In his introduction, Gould says:

It was not until I arrived in the country, and found myself surrounded by objects as strange as if I had been transported to another planet, that I conceived the idea of devoting a portion of my attention to the mammalian class of its extraordinary fauna.
During his short stay he made observations on the natural history and employed his skills as a taxidermist to obtain specimens.
First survey
The publication of this major work by Gould followed his A Monograph of the Macropodidae or Family of Kangaroos in 1841. This work was the first comprehensive survey of Australian mammals, and gave an account of their classification and description. Gould also included the indigenous names for the species from the lists he made while in Australia. He used these names to make requests of the local peoples for his specimens, and recorded the regions where the names were used. This conserved a number of common names, such as dibbler (Parantechinus apicalis), which were later recommended by authorities.
Artwork
The large lithographs reproduced the artwork of Richter, after the drawings and watercolours made in Australia by Gould and his wife, Elizabeth. (The contribution by Elizabeth Gould was uncredited). These were hand-coloured by a group of artists, led by Gabriel Bayfield, that required the completion of 26,572 plates. The illustrations produced during their visit to Australia were supplemented by the preserved specimens returned to England and detailed the characteristics of the species. These illustrations have become iconic images of the mammals of Australia. Among the best known of the illustrations from the work are the two of Thylacinus cynocephalus (Tasmanian tiger), copied since its publication and the most frequently reproduced, made more recognizable by Cascade Brewery's appropriation for its label in 1987. The government of Tasmania published a monochromatic reproduction of the same image in 1934, the author Louisa Anne Meredith also copied it for Tasmanian Friends and Foes (1881).
Subscription format
The Mammals of Australia was published by subscription in the format Imperial Folio; 13 parts in three volumes were issued from 1845 until 1863. To these the author added An Introduction to The Mammals of Australia (1863) in a separate work. This provided corrections and updates, a new preface, introduction, and a list of the mammals of the three volumes. The first two volumes were complete surveys of orders 'Marsupiata' (marsupials), and, with Rodentia in the third, it formed the sum of known mammalian species of Australia. With the addition of those contained in the later Introduction the total of species described reached 166. The same work notes the exclusion of marine mammals such as whales from the volumes, but reprints a manuscript by Charles Coxen on the dugong.
Beyond the scientific value of this comprehensive survey, the document is cited in reference to its subject's conservation. Some of the species included in the work, such as Onychogalea lunata (crescent nailtail wallaby), have since succumbed to changes in land use since European colonisation.

The work was received with acclaim, but the high cost of production, especially of the coloured plates, reduced its accessibility. The original listed price was £41 for the complete set of volumes.  The public curiosity for the unique fauna of Australia was met by this handsomely illustrated and comprehensive survey, and it spawned imitations in Australia. The curator of the Australian Museum, Gerard Krefft, produced the more affordable The Mammals of Australia (1871); intended for educational purposes and influenced by Gould's illustrations. Gracius Broinowski's abandoned work, Birds and Mammals of Australia (1884), so closely imitated the plates that an injunction was threatened by its publisher.


A marine mammal observer (MMO) is a professional in environmental consulting who specializes in whales and dolphins.
In recent years there has been increased concern for the effect of man-made noise pollution in the ocean, particularly upon cetaceans - which are known to be sensitive to sound. As a result, environmental regulations have been introduced in an attempt to minimise negative impacts on marine wildlife. These guidelines have focused on the oil industry's seismic exploration for offshore oil. They center on the practice of delaying or shutting down the use of air-guns if a whale or dolphin is sighted nearby. As a result, the International Association of Oil & Gas Producers released a report in 2017 describing recommended monitoring and mitigation measures for cetaceans during marine seismic survey geophysical operations. An MMO will implement these regulations in the field.
When on board the seismic vessel, the MMO's job is two-fold:

To spot sensitive wildlife species
To monitor adherence to the guidelines.
Spotting, and identifying, animals involves long hours of visual surveys. Detecting cetaceans with hydrophones is known as Passive Acoustic Monitoring (PAM), and this is an increasingly common technique used in addition to visual surveys. Ensuring adherence to guidelines requires a thorough knowledge of the regulations, understanding of the operations and the ability to communicate effectively with the crew. MMOs usually have a strong background in marine biology and conservation. Increasingly, the oil industry is employing a 'best practice' attitude to environmental commitment and voluntarily taking on MMOs as independent observers in areas where no government regulations exist. In some circumstances guidelines may be open to interpretation or the environmental conditions unique and the MMO will be called upon to advise on a sensible mitigation protocol.
As well as the seismic exploration industry, MMOs may also be required during; oil rig decommissioning, where disused oil platforms on the seabed are removed by large amounts of explosives, marine construction projects and; military trials of powerful new active sonar systems. Typically MMO duties are funded by the surveying company.
Noise  from human activity in the ocean environment is likely to increase - and become a bigger environmental issue. Discussion of how to minimize the negative effects of noise upon whales, dolphins and other marine-life will no doubt continue between industry, government agencies, military, environmental organizations and academics. It will be the MMO who puts this into practice in the field.


Milk is usually a white liquid food (but can be shades of yellow, cream, pink, or brown) produced by the mammary glands of lactating mammals. It is the primary source of nutrition for young mammals before they are able to digest solid food. Milk contains many nutrients, including calcium and protein, as well as lactose and saturated fat; the enzyme lactase is needed to break down lactose. Immune factors and immune-modulating components in milk contribute to milk immunity. The first milk, which is called colostrum, contains antibodies and immune-modulating components that strengthen the immune system against many diseases.
As an agricultural product, milk is collected from farm animals, mostly cattle, on a dairy. It is used by humans as a drink and as the base ingredient for dairy products. The US CDC recommends that children over the age of 12 months (the minimum age to stop giving breast milk or formula) should have two servings of milk products a day, and more than six billion people worldwide consume milk and milk products. The ability for adult humans to digest milk relies on lactase persistence, so lactose intolerant individuals have trouble digesting lactose.
In 2011, dairy farms produced around 730 million tonnes (800 million short tons) of milk from 260 million dairy cows. India is the world's largest producer of milk and the leading exporter of skimmed milk powder. New Zealand, Germany, and the Netherlands are the largest exporters of milk products. Between 750 and 900 million people live in dairy-farming households.
Etymology and terminology
The term milk comes from "Old English meoluc (West Saxon), milc (Anglian), from Proto-Germanic *meluks 'milk' (source also of Old Norse mjolk, Old Frisian melok, Old Saxon miluk, Dutch melk, Old High German miluh, German Milch, Gothic miluks)".
Since 1961, the term milk has been defined under Codex Alimentarius standards as "the normal mammary secretion of milking animals obtained from one or more milkings without either addition to it or extraction from it, intended for consumption as liquid milk or for further processing." The term dairy refers to animal milk and animal milk production.
Types of consumption
There are two distinct categories of milk consumption: all infant mammals drink milk directly from their mothers' bodies, and it is their primary source of nutrition; and humans obtain milk from other mammals for consumption by humans of all ages, as one component of a varied diet.
Nutrition for infant mammals
In almost all mammals, milk is fed to infants through breastfeeding, either directly or by expressing the milk to be stored and consumed later. The early milk from mammals is called colostrum. Colostrum contains antibodies that provide protection to the newborn baby as well as nutrients and growth factors. The makeup of the colostrum and the period of secretion varies from species to species.
For humans, the World Health Organization recommends exclusive breastfeeding for six months and breastfeeding in addition to other food for up to two years of age or more. In some cultures it is common to breastfeed children for three to five years, and the period may be longer.
Fresh goats' milk is sometimes substituted for breast milk, which introduces the risk of the child developing electrolyte imbalances, metabolic acidosis, megaloblastic anemia, and a host of allergic reactions.
Food product for humans
In many cultures, especially in the West, humans continue to consume milk beyond infancy, using the milk of other mammals (especially cattle, goats and sheep) as a food product. Initially, the ability to digest milk was limited to children as adults did not produce lactase, an enzyme necessary for digesting the lactose in milk. People therefore converted milk to curd, cheese, and other products to reduce the levels of lactose. Thousands of years ago, a chance mutation spread in human populations in northwestern Europe that enabled the production of lactase in adulthood. This mutation allowed milk to be used as a new source of nutrition which could sustain populations when other food sources failed. Milk is processed into a variety of products such as cream, butter, yogurt, kefir, ice cream and cheese. Modern industrial processes use milk to produce casein, whey protein, lactose, condensed milk, powdered milk, and many other food-additives and industrial products.
Whole milk, butter, and cream have high levels of saturated fat. The sugar lactose is found only in milk, and possibly in forsythia flowers and a few tropical shrubs. Lactase, the enzyme needed to digest lactose, reaches its highest levels in the human small intestine immediately after birth, and then begins a slow decline unless milk is consumed regularly. Those groups who continue to tolerate milk have often exercised great creativity in using the milk of domesticated ungulates, not only cattle, but also sheep, goats, yaks, water buffalo, horses, reindeer and camels. India is the largest producer and consumer of cattle milk and buffalo milk in the world.
History
Humans first learned to consume the milk of other mammals regularly following the domestication of animals during the Neolithic Revolution or the development of agriculture. This development occurred independently in several global locations from as early as 9000–7000 BC in Mesopotamia to 3500–3000 BC in the Americas. People first domesticated the most important dairy animals – cattle, sheep and goats – in Southwest Asia, although domestic cattle had been independently derived from wild aurochs populations several times since. Initially animals were kept for meat, and archaeologist Andrew Sherratt has suggested that dairying, along with the exploitation of domestic animals for hair and labor, began much later in a separate secondary products revolution in the fourth millennium BC. Sherratt's model is not supported by recent findings, based on the analysis of lipid residue in prehistoric pottery, that shows that dairying was practiced in the early phases of agriculture in Southwest Asia, by at least the seventh millennium BC.
From Southwest Asia domestic dairy animals spread to Europe (beginning around 7000 BC but did not reach Britain and Scandinavia until after 4000 BC), and South Asia (7000–5500 BC). The first farmers in central Europe and Britain milked their animals. Pastoral and pastoral nomadic economies, which rely predominantly or exclusively on domestic animals and their products rather than crop farming, were developed as European farmers moved into the Pontic–Caspian steppe in the fourth millennium BC, and subsequently spread across much of the Eurasian steppe. Sheep and goats were introduced to Africa from Southwest Asia, but African cattle may have been independently domesticated around 7000–6000 BC. Camels, domesticated in central Arabia in the fourth millennium BC, have also been used as dairy animals in North Africa and the Arabian Peninsula. The earliest Egyptian records of burn treatments describe burn dressings using milk from mothers of male babies. In the rest of the world (i.e., East and Southeast Asia, the Americas and Australia), milk and dairy products were historically not a large part of the diet, either because they remained populated by hunter-gatherers who did not keep animals or the local agricultural economies did not include domesticated dairy species. Milk consumption became common in these regions comparatively recently, as a consequence of European colonialism and political domination over much of the world in the last 500 years.
In the Middle Ages, milk was called the "virtuous white liquor" because alcoholic beverages were safer to consume than the water generally available. Incorrectly thought to be blood diverted from the womb to the breast, it was also known as "white blood", and treated like blood for religious dietary purposes and in humoral theory.
James Rosier's record of the 1605 voyage made by George Weymouth to New England reported that the Wabanaki people Weymouth captured in Maine milked "Rain-Deere and Fallo-Deere." But Journalist Avery Yale Kamila and food historians said Rosier "misinterpreted the evidence." Historians report the Wabanaki did not domesticate deer. The tribes of the northern woodlands have historically been making nut milk. Cows were imported to New England in 1624.
Industrialization
The growth in urban population, coupled with the expansion of the railway network in the mid-19th century, brought about a revolution in milk production and supply. Individual railway firms began transporting milk from rural areas to London from the 1840s and 1850s. Possibly the first such instance was in 1846, when St Thomas's Hospital in Southwark contracted with milk suppliers outside London to ship milk by rail. The Great Western Railway was an early and enthusiastic adopter, and began to transport milk into London from Maidenhead in 1860, despite much criticism. By 1900, the company was transporting over 25 million imperial gallons (110 million litres; 30 million US gallons) annually. The milk trade grew slowly through the 1860s, but went through a period of extensive, structural change in the 1870s and 1880s.

Urban demand began to grow, as consumer purchasing power increased and milk became regarded as a required daily commodity. Over the last three decades of the 19th century, demand for milk in most parts of the country doubled or, in some cases, tripled. Legislation in 1875 made the adulteration of milk illegal – This combined with marketing campaigns to change the image of milk (pasteurization in the 1930s, health benefits in the 1980s with "Milk: It does a body good" and 1990s with "got milk?", etc.) The proportion of rural imports by rail as a percentage of total milk consumption in London grew from under 5% in the 1860s to over 96% by the early 20th century. By that point, the supply system for milk was the most highly organized and integrated of any food product. Milk was analyzed for infection with tuberculosis. In 1907 180 samples were tested in Birmingham and 13.3% were found to be infected.
The first glass bottle packaging for milk was used in the 1870s. The first company to do so may have been the New York Dairy Company in 1877. The Express Dairy Company in England began glass bottle production in 1880. In 1884, Hervey Thatcher, an American inventor from New York, invented a glass milk bottle, called Thatcher's Common Sense Milk Jar, which was sealed with a waxed paper disk. In 1932, plastic-coated paper milk cartons were introduced commercially.
In 1863, French chemist and biologist Louis Pasteur invented pasteurization, a method of killing harmful bacteria in beverages and food products. He developed this method while on summer vacation in Arbois, to remedy the frequent acidity of the local wines. He found out experimentally that it is sufficient to heat a young wine to only about 50–60 °C (122–140 °F) for a brief time to kill the microbes, and that the wine could be nevertheless properly aged without sacrificing the final quality. In honor of Pasteur, the process became known as pasteurization. Pasteurization was originally used as a way of preventing wine and beer from souring. Commercial pasteurizing equipment was produced in Germany in the 1880s, and producers adopted the process in Copenhagen and Stockholm by 1885.
Homogenization, the process of distributing the milk fat evenly throughout the rest of the milk, was first invented in the late 1800s and exhibited by Auguste Gaulin at the 1900 World's Fair in Paris. Within 40 years, the use of homogenization spread to other countries and is now commonplace.


This article records new taxa of fossil mammals of every kind that are scheduled to be described during the year 2026, as well as other significant discoveries and events related to paleontology of mammals that are scheduled to occur in the year 2026.
AfrotheriansProboscideansProboscidean research
A study on the morphology of the astragalus and calcaneus in extant and extinct proboscideans, providing evidence of morphological changes of ankles bones related to increase of the body mass and evolution of the columnar posture of members of the group, is published by Tetaert et al. (2026).
Semprebon, Sanders & Uttecht (2026) reconstruct diets and habitats of Moeritherium and Phiomia on the basis of their tooth wear, interpreting the former taxon as feeding on soft vegetation and likely frequenting aquatic habitats, and interpreting the latter taxon as likely living in a terrestrial forest or woodland environment.
Alquézar-Blesa et al. (2026) study the feeding behaviors of Miocene Gomphotherium and Prodeinotherium from Artesilla and Tarazona (Spain), reporting evidence from the study of tooth wear indicative of a greater degree of dietary flexibility than indicated by tooth morphology, including evidence of grass consumption.
Bader, Gasparik & Segesdi (2026) compare the microanatomy of femur of Deinotherium giganteum and mammoths, reporting evidence of differences that might be linked to distinct weight-bearing adaptations.
Description of new fossil material of Mammut shansiense from the Yushe Basin (China) and a study on the phylogenetic affinities of the species is published by Zhang et al. (2026), who recover the studied species as closely related to the American mastodon.
Sanders, Ji & Jablonski (2026) describe fossil material of Stegodon zhaotongensis from the Miocene strata of the Zhaotong Formation at the Shuitangba site (Yunnan, China), reaffirm the validity of the species, and interpret its anatomical features as consistent with origination of stegodonts from stegolophodonts in Asia.
Liu et al. (2026) report the first discovery of fossil material of Stegodon from the late Pliocene or early Pleistocene strata from the Shandong Province (China), referred to the species Stegodon chiai.
A study on the chemical composition of teeth of Gomphotherium angustidens from the Miocene (Langhian) strata from Quinta da Farinheira (Portugal), providing evidence of seasonal changes in the diet of the studied proboscidean and probable evidence of geophagia during fixed times of the year, is published by Coimbra et al. (2026).
Han et al. (2026) report the discovery of a molar of a member of the genus Gomphotherium from the Miocene strata of the Jinsu Formation (North Korea), extending known geographical distribution of members of this genus in Asia.
New fossil material of Notiomastodon platensis is described from the Lujanian strata of the La Chumbiada Member of the Lujan Formation (Buenos Aires Province, Argentina) by Prado et al. (2026).
Evidence from the study of strontium, carbon and oxygen isotopic composition of remains of Notiomastodon platensis from Pleistocene sites in the states of Pernambuco, Paraíba and Sergipe (Brazil), indicative of a predominantly C4-based diet of the studied individuals and indicating that the studied sample included both sedentary and mobile individuals, is presented by Cruz et al. (2026).
The first complete skull of a member of the genus Cuvieronius (C. cf. tropicus) from North America reported to date is described from the Pleistocene (Irvingtonian) strata of the Camp Rice Formation (New Mexico, United States) by Houde et al. (2026), who argue that North/Central American and South American members of the genus Cuvieronius likely represent two distinct cryptic species.
González-Guarda et al. (2026) reconstruct the environment of late Pleistocene Notiomastodon platensis and Cuvieronius hyodon from Ecuador on the basis of their tooth wear and carbon isotopic composition of their tooth enamel, interpreted as indicative of predominantly open and dry habitats.
Kumar (2026) reports the first discovery of fossil material of Anancus sivalensis from Indian Siwaliks, recovered from the Pliocene Tatrot Formation in Himachal Pradesh.
Lambert (2026) reevaluates the affinites of "Platybelodon" barnumbrowni from the Late Miocene of Nebraska (United States), transferring the species to the genus Protanancus (the first record of the genus from North America), as well as describing "Serbelodon" burnhami and an unnamed taxon from the Bone Valley of Florida as sharing affinities with Protanancus.
Armaroli et al. (2026) reconstruct the ecology and habitat use of straight-tusked elephants from the Neumark-Nord site (Germany) on the basis of the study of the strontium isotopic composition of their remains and on the basis of proteomic analysis, reporting evidence indicating that the studied elephant assemblage included both male and female individuals from geographically separated populations that migrated to the lake basins of Neumark-Nord, and evidence of seasonal mobility of the studied individuals, including probable evidence of two male individuals dwelling in mountainous areas within 300 km of Neumark-Nord.
Kusaka et al. (2026) provide the radiocarbon ages of fossils of Palaeoloxodon naumanni from Honshu and Shikoku (Japan), determine the last appearance date of the species to be 36,400–35,700 calibrated years before present, and interpret the fossil record as indicative of short coexistence of the species with Upper Paleolithic humans and its likely extinction at 35,000-33,000 calibrated years before present.
Evidence from the study of the long bones of adult Palaeoloxodon tiliensis and juvenile Palaeoloxodon falconeri, indicating that bones of the former species were not scaled-down version of bones of its mainland ancestors but rather included a combination of ancestral traits, adaptations associated with a graviportal lifestyle and juvenile-like characteristics, is presented by Bader, Göhlich & Houssaye (2026).
Evidence from the study of the straight-tusked elephant specimen from Middle Pleistocene site of Contrada Monticelli (Apulia, Italy) and other specimens of straight-tusked elephants and Mammuthus meridionalis from the Lower and Middle Pleistocene of Italy, indicating that the majority of purported morphological characters differentiating Mammuthus and Palaeoloxodon are not reliable when intraspecific variability is taken into consideration, is presented by Stefanelli et al. (2026).
A study on the anatomy and life history of the woolly mammoth specimen from Niederweningen (Switzerland) that was the first scientifically described perinatal mammoth individual is published by Scarborough et al. (2026).
Moreland et al. (2026) recover ancient DNA from mammoth ivory from the Hohle Fels cave (Germany), and report evidence of presence of mammoth specimens from multiple distinct lineages in the studied sample.
Zanina et al. (2026) reconstruct the environment and diet of the woolly mammoth calf specimen "Yana" from the Batagay section (Sakha, Russia) on the basis of the study of contents of its gastrointestinal tract and the material found between its forelimbs.
A new, nearly complete skeleton of a woolly mammoth, identified as a male aged approximately 30–40 years, is described from the latest Pleistocene strata from the Taymyr Peninsula (Russia) by Petrova et al. (2026).
Moots et al. (2026) determine sex of 521 woolly mammoth specimens on the basis of the study of ancient DNA, reporting evidence indicating that mammoths from bone accumulation sites were predominantly female, while mammoths from other depositional settings were predominantly male, and interpret these findings as suggestive of anthropogenic origin of mammoth bone accumulations and of preferential targeting of mammoth females by humans.
Hannold et al. (2026) reconstruct the diets of pygmy mammoths from Northern Channel Islands and Columbian mammoths from Rancho La Brea and coastal Santa Barbara in southern California on the basis of stable isotopes in tooth enamel.
Evidence from the study of tooth enamel of Columbian mammoths from 14 sites in the Central Basin of Mexico, interpreted as indicative of a generalist diet with varying proportions of C3 and C4 plants, is presented by Rodríguez-Franco et al. (2026).
Evidence from the study of carbon, oxygen and strontium isotope composition of Columbian mammoth remains from the Colby Site (Wyoming, United States), indicative of the studied mammoths feeding mainly on C3 plants and having a range of less than 250 km, is presented by Doering, Mackie & Herron (2026), who interpret the assemblage of mammoth remains from the studied site as more likely resulting from multiple hunting episoded than from a single massive one.
Evidence indicating that morphology of the astragalus of Quaternary elephantids was influenced by their body size to a greater degree than by their phylogenetic affinities is presented by Fidalgo et al. (2026).
SireniansSirenia research
Saha, Bhardwaj & Bajpai (2026) study the restructuring of the sirenian skull throughout the evolutionary history of the group on the basis of data from extant and fossil taxa.
Wagner et al. (2026) provide a methodology for quantification of the degree of pachyostosis in ribs and vertebrae of sirenians on the basis of the study of extant and extinct taxa.
Pérez-Ramos et al. (2026) present a virtual reconstruction of the vertebral column of Pezosiren portelli.
New fossil material of sirenians with dugongid affinities, associated with an invertebrate assemblage that might be indicative of presence of seagrass habitats, is described from the Oligocene strata of the Maniyara Fort Formation (India) by Joshi et al. (2026).
Shinmura & Sawada (2026) reconstruct diets of sirenians from Miocene to Pliocene marine sediments in Hokkaido (Japan) on the basis of stable carbon isotope ratios of fatty acids and sterols extracted from their bones, providing evidence of Metaxytherium feeding on seagrass and evidence of feeding of Dusisiren and the Takikawa sea cow on seaweed.
Other afrotheriansMiscellaneous afrotherian research
Alcalá et al. (2026) describe new fossil material of Pliohyrax graecus from the Miocene (Vallesian) strata from the La Roma 2 site (Province of Teruel, Spain), representing the most complete hyracoid record from the Iberian Peninsula reported to date.
Raynaud et al. (2026) interpret the composition of the Eocene plant assemblage from the Bultu-Zile site (Meryemdere Formation; Turkey), reconstructed on the basis of study of the palynoflora from this site, as indicating that embrithopods from the site lived in a swamp-freshwater environment, representing one of the first embrithopod records outside mangrove-dominated ecosystems.
Evidence from the study isotopic composition of tooth enamel of Eocene embrithopods from Balkanatolia, interpreted as indicative of the studied mammals living in fully terrestrial rather than semi-aquatic environment, is presented by Robert et al. (2026).
EuarchontogliresPrimatesPrimate research
Evidence of gradual expansion of the frontal lobe during the evolutionary history of primates, as well as evidence of rapid expansion of nonfrontal neocortical regions that might have been linked to enhanced visual processing in primates, is presented by Kay et al. (2026).
Cartmill & Brown (2026) review the history of the visual-predation theory, and argue that it represents the best available explanation for the origin of primates.
A study on the morphology of molar teeth of extant and extinct members of Euarchonta, providing evidence of evolution of morphological changes associated with increased herbivory at the base of Euprimates, is published by Bradley-Cronkwright et al. (2026).
Marigó et al. (2026) review new discoveries and main advances in the study of Paleogene primates from Spain from late 2013 to 2025.
One of the oldest euprimate petrosal bones reported to date, likely belonging to Marcgodinotius indicus, is described from the Eocene strata from the Vastan Lignite Mine (India) by Silcox et al. (2026).
Alfieri et al. (2026) reconstruct the locomotor behavior of Malagasy Quaternary lemurs on the basis of the study of their humeral and femoral trabecular architecture, reporting evidence of suspensory adaptations not only in sloth lemurs, but also in Megaladapis edwardsi.
Cooke et al. (2026) report the first discovery of mandibular remains of Stirtonia victoriae from the La Victoria Formation (Colombia), and interpret their anatomy as indicative of leaf-eating adaptations of the studied monkey.
Arias-Martorell et al. (2026) report evidence of similarities of shape of the radial head of Pliobates cataloniae and extant apes, and interpret Pliobates as better adapted to climbing than to behaviors involving forelimb-dominated suspension.
Arias-Martorell et al. (2026) compare the shape of the distal part of the humerus of Pliobates cataloniae and other extinct and extant simians, and interpret Pliobates as unlikely to perform acrobatic suspensory behaviors seen in extant gibbons.
Pickford & de Matos (2026) revise the fossil record of at least three assemblages of Old World monkeys from the Humpata Plateau (Angola), including possible record of a mandrill-like monkey from the middle Pliocene assemblage from Tchiua.
A study on the composition of the Old World monkey assemblage (dominated by Colobus sp. and Chlorocebus sp.) from the Pleistocene Markaytoli site (Ethiopia) is published by Smail et al. (2026).
Pallas (2026) identifies fossil mandibles from the Pleistocene sites Asbole (Ethiopia) and Koobi Fora (Kenya) belonging to members of the tribe Colobini, including a taxon with similarities to members of the genus Colobus and a taxon with similarities to members of the Piliocolobus-Procolobus lineage.
Evidence from the study of tooth wear of Theropithecus oswaldi from the Pliocene strata from Makapansgat and from the Pleistocene strata from Swartkrans (South Africa), indicative of different dietary behaviors of Pliocene and Pleistocene members of the species (with the diet of the Pliocene specimens including more mechanically resistant food), is presented by L'Engle Williams, Schmidt & Remy (2026).
Hidalgo-Trujillo et al. (2026) report evidence from the study of tooth wear indicative of dietary differentiation of extinct papionins from the Turkana Basin.
Evidence of similarity of molar morphology to those of members of the genus Papio, and likely evidence of opportunistic feeding strategies, is reported in a specimen of Paradolichopithecus aff. arvernensis from the Dafnero-3 site (Greece) by Plastiras et al. (2026); Koutalis et al. (2026) present virtually reconstructed models of the face of the same individual.
Choudhary et al. (2026) provided new paleomagnetic and stratigraphic data for the Ramnagar region of India, re-dating its primate-yielding localities to 13.03–11.59 Ma and extending the known chronological range of the primates like Sivapithecus, Kapi and Ramadapis by approximately 200,000 years.
Evidence from the study of the cranial endocast of Rudapithecus hungaricus, indicative of presence of sulcal patterns similar to those seen in gorillas, is presented by Assance, Silcox & Begun (2026).
Spassov et al. (2026) report the discovery of a nearly complete femur of cf. Graecopithecus from the Miocene strata from the Azmaka-6 locality near Chirpan (Bulgaria), sharing morphological traits with both quadrupeds and bipeds, and interpreted as indicative of a transitional locomotor repertoire including both terrestrial quadrupedalism and an early form of facultative bipedalism.
Evidence from the study of teeth and the bony labyrinth of Oreopithecus bambolii, interpreted as indicating that the studied primate was more likely to be a derived stem hominoid than a close relative of Miocene apes from Europe or gibbons, is presented by Urciuoli et al. (2026).
Jansma & Locke (2026) interpret Xenopithecus koruensis as a valid basal hominoid taxon distinct from Proconsul africanus.
Williams et al. (2026) study the anatomy of ulna and femur or Sahelanthropus tchadensis, interpreted as indicative of presence of adaptations to bipedalism in spite of similarities in size and geometric morphometric shape to bones of chimpanzees.
De Jager et al. (2026) study the frequency, position, and variability of cortical sulcal imprints in endocasts of extant chimpanzees and bonobos, providing a comparative resource for the studies of the brain evolution based on hominin fossils.
Dunbar (2026) reevaluates data from the study of Deaner & Nunn (1999), finds evidence of changes in brain size following increases in body size in the evolution of primates but in a more complicated way that suggested by the original brain lag hypothesis, with an increase in body size followed by a progressively greater increase in brain size, and finds evidence of such evolution of brain and body size in hominins.
General paleoanthropology
Cerrito, Burkart & van Schaik (2026) review the techniques used to extract information on life history from hominin fossils.
Towle (2026) reviews longstanding issues in the systematics of hominins, including non-monophyly of at least the genus Australopithecus and mosaic trait distribution among hominin taxa, and proposes to subsume the genera Paranthropus and Australopithecus within the genus Homo.
Begun (2026) reviews the fossil record of African apes and humans, and argues that the lack of hominin fossils from Africa from the interval between 13.5 and 6–7 million years ago might not simply be the result of incompleteness of the fossil record, and is potentially consistent with the origin of hominins in Eurasia and their dispersal into Africa after 7 million years ago.
Gardner et al. (2026) study changes of body size throughout the evolutionary history of hominins, and interpret their finding as consistent with marked body mass increase in members of the genus Homo other than Homo habilis and Homo rudolfensis.
A study on the morphological diversity of the femur and the humerus in extant hominids is published by Aramendi (2026), who interprets her findings as indicative of variable utility of different long bones for taxonomic indentification of hominin fossils, and as indicating that some of the variability observed in isolated or fragmentary hominin fossils might not be caused by presence of more than one taxon in the studied fossil material.
Evidence indicating that proximity in principal component analysis in the studies of morphological variation is not necessarily indicative of close phylogenetic affinities of fossil hominins is presented by Raskin et al. (2026).
Evidence indicating that hominins repeatedly inhabited areas of Africa with climate suitable for both cutaneous and visceral leishmaniasis during their evolutionary history is presented by Trájer (2026).
Evidence from the study of ethnohistorical and ethnographic records of modern endurance pursuit hunters, indicating that optimization of subsistence efficiency and signaling of hunting prowess were likely the primary selective pressures in the evolution of a running gait of early hominins, is presented by Winterhalder & Morin (2026).
Hunter et al. (2026) compare the carpal morphology of apes (including fossil hominins and modern humans), providing evidence of hominins and extant African apes sharing morphological features of carpal morphology that are likely linked to knuckle walking, and argue that human wrist evolved from an African ape-like wrist.
Evidence from the study of extant Japanese macaques, indicating that the initial shift from quadrupedalism to bipedalism in the hominin evolution might have involved a shift of the primary action of the gluteus medius without any required morphological change, is presented by Shitara et al. (2026).
Kurki & Wall-Scheffler (2026) study the variation of pelvic canal dimensions in extant humans and extinct hominins, finding no evidence of a single trajectory of evolution of hominin pelvic shape.
Komza, Viola & Schroeder (2026) interpret the evolution of the morphology of hominin midfoot as affected by selection for bipedalism in the lateral side in early bipeds such as Ardipithecus ramidus and shaped by a broad range of evolutionary processes in later hominins.
Evidence from the study of the organization of mineral nanocrystals in teeth of extant and extinct hominins and other primates, indicating that enamel nanocrystal misorientation in hominin teeth changed in conjunction with dietary shifts of members of the human lineage (including the introduction of meat and agricultural products into their diet), is presented by Gilbert et al. (2026).
Gat, Subsol & Braga (2026) compare the development of the cortical bone in the mandible during the early ontogeny of extant chimpanzees and humans and in fossil hominins, linking the robust morphology of the mandible of Paranthropus to a distinct developmental trajectory.
Orr et al. (2026) provide a catalog of isolated postcranial remains of hominins from Drimolen (South Africa) collected between 1994 and 2015.
New postcranial fossil material of hominins is reported from the Kromdraai fossil site (South Africa) by DeSilva et al. (2026).
Alemseged et al. (2026) report the discovery of fossil material of Paranthropus from the Mille-Logya research area determined to be between 2.5 and 2.9-million-years-old, representing the first record of the genus in the Afar region of Ethiopia and one of the oldest records of a member of the genus reported to date.
Rak & Kimbel (2026) interpret the prognathism observed in the specimen KNM WT 17000 as a derived rather than primitive trait, and interpret Australopithecus/Paranthropus aethiopicus as the probable sister taxon of Australopithecus/Paranthropus boisei.
Critical reevaluation of the study of Zanolli et al. (2025) that placed the hominin specimen SK 15 from the Swartkrans cave (South Africa) in a previously unrecognized species of Paranthropus (P. capensis) is published by Clarke & Pickering (2026).
Pickering & Clarke (2026) reevaluate claims of affinities of the hominin specimen SK 54 from the Swartkrans cave with members of the genus Homo made Braga et al. by (2023) and Martin et al. (2024), and argue that the specimen is more likely to be an individual of Paranthropus robustus.
Evidence from the study of internal bone structure of tibiae and femora of Paranthropus robustus from Swartkrans and Australopithecus from Sterkfontein (South Africa), interpreted as indicative of different locomotor repertoires and likely distinct ecological niches of the studied hominins, is presented by Cazenave et al. (2026).
O'Hara et al. (2026) report evidence of rapid evolution of the morphology of premolar teeth of Paranthropus robustus, interpreted as likely related to dietary pressures.
Evidence of a comparable range of stress values on the pelvic floor of australopithecines and humans during birth is presented by Frémondière et al. (2026).
Beaudet et al. (2026) present a digital reconstruction of the face of the Australopithecus specimen Stw 573 ("Little Foot").
Hershkovitz et al. (2026) report evidence of greater similarity of the vertebral apophyseal ring of Lucy (and likely spinal biomechanics of the studied individual) to those of extant African apes than to those of modern humans, and interpret this finding as indicative of emergence of fully modern human gait later in the hominin evolution.
Hatala et al. (2026) describe approximately 1.43-million-years-old hominin footprints from northern Kenya produced by a group that included multiple adult males, preserving a morphology similar to footprints attributed to Paranthropus boisei, but produced by hominins larger than known representatives of that species.
Evidence indicating that the evolution cranial morphological variation in members of the genus Homo was primarily influenced by selective constraints, their releases and by stabilizing selection rather than by gradual directional selection is presented by Hubbe & Harvati (2026).
Blasi-Toccacceli et al. (2026) describe fossil material of a 1.84-million-years-old member of the genus Homo from the Shungura Formation (Ethiopia), including the oldest well-preserved shoulder and arm bones of a member of this genus, interpreted as indicative of reduction of use of arms in arboreal locomotion early in the evolution of Homo.
The most complete skeleton of Homo habilis reported to date is described from the upper Burgi Member of the Koobi Fora Formation (Kenya) by Grine et al. (2026).
Cofran, Hurst & Hawks (2026) present a virtual reconstruction of the brain endocast of Homo naledi, providing evidence of presence of a combination of ancestral and derived features in the brain of the studied hominin.
Madupe et al. (2026) determine the sex of at least 20 individuals of Homo naledi from the Rising Star cave system (Cradle of Humankind, South Africa) on the basis of proteomic analysis of tooth enamel, finding no evidence of male markers in the studied sample.
Delagnes et al. (2026) study the mobility of Early Pleistocene hominins from the Lower Omo Valley (Shungura Formation, Ethiopia), providing evidence of transport of quartz for the production of Oldowan stone tools from the alluvial fans of the Hamar Range, over 10 km from the sites preserving the stone tools, located in areas that lacked stone material but had rich faunal assemblages.
Evidence from the study of Oldowan tools from the Shungura Formation, indicating that different sediment types produced characteristic wear of the studied tools that can be distinguished wear caused by other types of sediment and from anthropogenic use-wear, is presented by Galland et al. (2026).
Dominguez-Rodrigo et al. (2026) report the discovery of a new site (Emiliano Aguirre Korongo) at Olduvai Gorge (Tanzania) preserving proboscidean remains with bone modifications interpreted as the authors as evidence of butchery assisted by stone tools, and interpret the fossil record of megafaunal bone modifications at Olduvai Gorge as consistent with more frequent and widespread megafaunal butchery after 1.8 million years ago, roughly coinciding with the replacement of Oldowan industries by Acheulean ones.
Evidence from the study of burnt bones of small mammals from the Acheulean deposits from the Wonderwerk Cave (South Africa), indicative of repeated use of fire by Early Pleistocene hominins, is presented by Marin-Monfort et al. (2026).
Evidence from the study of an approximately 1.6 million years old assemblage of associated hominin fossils and butchered fauna from the KBS Member of the Koobi Fora Formation, indicative of consistent foraging strategies of early Homo across time and in different environments, is presented by Forrest et al. (2026).
Campo-Gómez et al. (2026) determine prey carrying capacity and total biomass of the Early Pleistocene large mammal community available to hominins from the Sima del Elefante site (Spain), interpreted as capable of sustaining hominin groups of low density.
Wang et al. (2026) study the morphology of lumbar vertebrae of immature individuals of Homo erectus and Australopithecus sediba from Georgia, Kenya and South Africa, reporting evidence of establishment of vertebral traits related to bipedal locomotion early in hominin ontogeny and evolution.
Evidence indicating that Early to Middle Pleistocene hominins from the northern Indian Subcontinent lived in a mosaic environment dominated by savannas is presented by Kaur et al. (2026).
Tu et al. (2026) determine the three crania of Homo erectus from the Yunxian site (Hubei, China) to be approximately 1.77 million years old, representing the oldest securely dated hominin fossils from eastern Asia reported to date.
Gousset et al. (2026) study the phylogenetic relationships of Homo luzonensis, and interpret the studied hominin as most likely originating from an Asian population of Homo erectus, resulting in evolutionary reversals in an insular context and likely caused by living in tropical environment.
A study on the technological characteristics of the stone tools from the Rizal Archaeological Site (Philippines) is published by Guibert et al. (2026).
Li et al. (2026) report a new Lower Paleolithic site with stone tools and animal remains (the Daanmiao site) in the Bailong River valley (Gansu, China) providing evidence of hominin occupation of western Qinling Mountain Ranges approximately 900,000 years ago, and evidence of more favorable habitat for early hominins in the studied area than in other parts of North China during the Mid-Pleistocene Transition.
Shao et al. (2026) determine two hominin crania from the Hulu Cave (China) to likely fall within a similar chronological range and date them to Marine Isotope Stage 16.
Fu et al. (2026) recover ancient enamel proteins from individuals of Homo erectus from the Middle Pleistocene Zhoukoudian, Hexian and Sunjiadong sites (China), reporting the discovery of an amino acid variant that was previously identified in Denisovans, and argue that super-archaic introgressed DNA identified in Denisovan genome as likely introduced through contact with populations related to Late Middle Pleistocene H. erectus from East Asia.
Evidence from taphonomic analyses of remains of Stegodon from Liang Bua (Flores, Indonesia), indicating that Komodo dragons had primary access to Stegodon carcasses and that Homo floresiensis likely scavenged on low-utility elements left by Komodo dragons, is presented by Veatch et al. (2026), who find no evidence of intentional use of fire by Homo floresiensis.
A study on the pelvis of the holotype individual of Homo floresiensis, reporting evidence of similarities to members of the genus Homo consistent with human-like bipedalism, is published by Lewton et al. (2026).
Kaifu et al. (2026) report evidence of marked deformational plagiocephaly in individuals of Homo erectus and Homo floresiensis, and interpret it as likely linked to presence of modern human-like helpless infancy in the studied hominins.
Evidence from the study of charcoal from the Gesher Benot Ya'aqov site (Israel), interpreted as indicative of habitual gathering of firewood by early Middle Pleistocene hominins (likely from available driftwood), is presented by Allué et al. (2026).
Evidence of a consistent pattern of basalt acquisition by the Middle Pleistocene hominins for the production of Acheulian tools from the Gesher Benot Ya'aqov site, including evidence for different mode of procurement of basalt for the production of handaxes and cleavers, is presented by Golan, Ben Dor & Goren-Inbar (2026).
Evidence of selective procurement of flint by Middle Pleistocene hominins from the Gesher Benot Ya'aqov site, as well as evidence of stability of their procurement preferences throughout 50,000 years, is presented by Ekshtain et al. (2026).
A study on animals remains from the Caijiagou-C site in the Nihewan Basin (China), providing evidence of systematic processing of ungulate carcasses by early Middle Pleistocene hominins that involved diverse butchery stages, is published by Du et al. (2026).
A study on Acheulean tools from the Revilleja de Valparaíso (Spain), interpreted as indicative of presence of diverse technological traditions with distinct origins in Western Europe around 700,000 years ago, is published by García-Vadillo et al. (2026).
Approximately 430,000-years-old wooden tools are identified from the Marathousa site in the Megalopolis Basin (Greece) by Milks et al. (2026).
The conclusions about age of the Petralona skull from the study of Falguères et al. (2025) are contested by Kostopoulos & Lazaridis (2026) and reaffirmed by Falguères et al. (2026).
Martín-Francés et al. (2026) interpret the molar wear in the Sima de los Huesos hominins as suggestive of a mixed diet including similar proportions of meat and plant foods.
Parfitt & Bello (2026) describe a 480,000-years-old knapping tool made on an elephant bone from the Boxgrove Palaeolithic site (United Kingdom), representing the oldest case of an elephant bone being used as a raw material in Europe reported to date.
A study on the Acheulean handaxe variability in southeastern Britain, interpreted as consistent with presence of distinct regional cultural groups during the Marine Isotope Stage 11, is published by White et al. (2026).
García-Martínez et al. (2026) provide the first proteomics-based sex identification of a hominin tooth from the Middle Pleistocene of western Europe, using the analysis of the presence of amelogenin to attribute a hominin molar from the Middle Pleistocene site of Ruidera (Spain) to a male individual.
Rosas et al. (2026) review different models of evolution of European hominins during the Middle Pleistocene (including evolutionary models including all European population in the lineage ancestral to Neanderthals and the models proposing coexistence of multiple contemporaneous lineages in Europe) and the analytical frameworks supporting these models.
García-Martínez et al. (2026) report the discovery of a parietal bone from a new paleoanthropological site Ruidera (Spain), providing evidence of variability of cranial morphology of Middle Pleistocene hominins.
Yue et al. (2026) report evidence of production of diverse stone tools at the Xigou site (Henan, China) between 160,000 and 72,000 years ago, including evidence of well-organised core reduction strategies, production of diverse small flake-based tools, and hafted implements.
The earliest evidence of use of sophisticated, systematic centripetal flaking systems in eastern Asia known to date is reported from the late Middle Pleistocene Lingjing site (Henan, China) by Zhao et al. (2026).
Siemssen et al. (2026) report evidence of antibacterial properties of birch tar produced with methods used in Europe during the Middle Paleolithic.
Guil-Guerrero (2026) argues that consumption of fly larvae by Neanderthals postulated by Beasley, Lesnik & Speth (2025) does not by itself explain nitrogen isotope enrichment observed in Neanderthal collagen, interpreted as more likely to be primarily caused by targeted hunting and consumption of megafauna by Neanderthals.
Evidence from the study of bone microanatomy of Neanderthal remains from Sesselfelsgrotte (Germany), indicative of an overall similar growth trajectory of Neanderthals and modern humans during their early life, is presented by Miszkiewicz et al. (2026), who also report the presence of probably pathological interglobular dentin in the studied fossil material that might be evidence of a metabolic bone disease.
Zollikofer et al. (2026) compare the morphology of Neanderthal pelves from Sima de las Palomas (Spain) and Dederiyeh Cave (Syria) with those of modern humans, reporting evidence of morphological similarities of pelvic regions associated with childbirth, as well as evidence of differences in pelvic regions associated with locomotion.
Sorrentino et al. (2026) report evidence of presence of overall more robust calcaneus in Neanderthals compared to modern humans, with the closest similarity to calcanei of highly mobile, unshod modern human groups.
Verheijen et al. (2026) study evidence of Neanderthal activity in faunal remains from the Lehringen site (Germany), reporting evidence of defleshing of a straight-tusked elephant when its carcass was in fresh state and evidence of butchery of a beaver, bear and aurochs.
Evidence indicating that exploitation of shellfish by Neanderthals occupying the Cave of Los Aviones (Spain) happened primarily during the colder months of the year is presented by García-Escárzaga et al. (2026).
A study on Neanderthal teeth from the Chagyrskaya Cave in the Altai Mountains (Russia), indicating that the studied sample overall falls within the known Neanderthal phenotypic variability but also preserves specific morphological traits, is published by Gicqueau et al. (2026).
Massilani et al. (2026) present a high-quality genome of an approximately 110,000-years-old Neanderthal individual from the Denisova Cave (Russia), providing evidence of a closer relationship of the studied individual to a 120,000-years-old Neanderthal from the same cave than to a 80,000-years-old individual from the Chagyrskaya Cave or to European Neanderthals, evidence of gene flow from Denisovans in both Neanderthals from the Denisova Cave, and evidence of differentiation between Altai and European Neanderthals comparable to that of the most differentiated populations of modern humans.
Zubova et al. (2026) report evidence of deliberate invasive dental caries intervention in a 59,000-years-old Neanderthal molar from the Chagyrskaya Cave.
Evidence from the study of rhinocerotid remains from Middle Paleolithic sites in France and Spain, interpreted as consistent with use of rhinoceros teeth as tools (including soft hammers and anvils) by Neanderthals, is presented by Sanz-Royo et al. (2026).
Picin et al. (2026) report new mitogenomes of at least 7 Neanderthal individuals from the Stajnia Cave (Poland), interpreted as likely dating to Marine Isotope Stage 5, find that the studied individual carried mitochondrial DNA lineages related to those Western Europe and the northern Caucasus, and interpret their findings as possible evidence of a widespread mitochondrial DNA lineage that was subsequently replaced by the mtDNA found in late Neanderthals.
Evidence of exploitation of European pond turtles by Neanderthals occupying the Neumark-Nord site (Germany) during the Last Interglacial is presented by Gaudzinski-Windheuser et al. (2026).
Palancar et al. (2026) provide evidence of a clear morphological distinction between axes of Neanderthals and modern humans on the basis of the study of a Neanderthal axis from the Sidrón Cave (Spain).
Evidence from the study of metacarpal remains from the Sidrón Cave indicative of differences of metacarpal morphology of Neanderthals and modern humans is presented by Rosas et al. (2026).
Rodrigo et al. (2026) provide evidence from the study of animal remains from the Fumane Cave (Italy) indicative of a structured subsistence strategy of Neanderthals occupying the site, including processing of carcasses at kill locations and selective transport of high-yield portions of the carcasses into the cave for secondary processing.
Burke et al. (2026) determine the distribution of habitats suitable for Neanderthals and modern humans in Europe during stadial and interstadial events of Marine Isotope Stage 3, providing evidence of a shift but not complete disappearance of habitats suitable for Neanderthals as a result of climate changes, weak connectivity between optimal regions for Neanderthals, and overlaps between optimal regions of the two hominins.
A Neanderthal infant assigned to the 6- to 14-month age range, providing evidence of rapid somatic growth in early life of Neanderthals, is described from the Amud Cave (Israel) by Been et al. (2026).
Blinkhorn et al. (2026) study the variability of Levallois blanks from northeast Africa and southwest Asia, and interpret Levallois stone tools from northern Arabia dating to early Marine Isotope Stage 3 as likely produced by Neanderthals.
Evidence from the study of palynological assemblages from the Axlor site (Spain), indicative of marked shifts in landscape structure at the time of the Neanderthal occupation of the site, is presented by Pérez-Díaz et al. (2026).
Evidence of short-term Neanderthal occupations of the Eirós cave (Spain), indicative of high mobility of late Neanderthal communities from northwestern Iberian Peninsula, is presented by Rodríguez-Álvarez et al. (2026).
Fotiadou et al. (2026) reconstruct the demographic history of late Neanderthals on the basis of data from mitochondrial DNA, reporting evidence indicating that nearly all late Neanderthals from Europe belonged to a single mitochondrial DNA lineage, likely as a result of expansion across Europe from a refugium in southwestern France, and evidence of rapid decline in the effective population size of late Neanderthals shortly before their extinction; Sánchez Goñi & d'Errico (2026) link the presence of the refugium in southwestern France to the climatic configuration affecting western Europe 76,000 to 68,000 years ago.
Bossoms Mesa et al. (2026) reconstruct the genetic diversity of late Neanderthals from Belgium and France, finding no evidence of mating among close relatives or genetic deterioration prior to Neanderthal extinction.
Baykara et al. (2026) report evidence of sequential occupation of the Üçağızlı II Cave (Turkey) by Neanderthals and modern humans, and evidence of cultural continuity between members of the two human lineages occupying the site.
Schoenemann et al. (2026) interpret differences in brain anatomy of Neanderthals and modern humans as falling within the range of differences between modern human populations, and find no evidence of significang cognitive differences between Neanderthals and modern humans that might have contributed to Neanderthal extinction.
Platt, Harris & Tishkoff (2026) reconstruct likely patterns of interbreeding between Neanderthals and anatomically modern humans on the basis of the study of their X chromosomes, interpreted as indicating that their interbreeding predominantly involved Neanderthal men mating with anatomically modern women.
Evidence from the study of Middle and Upper Paleolithic assemblages, indicating that overall anatomically modern human occupations can be distinguished from Neanderthal ones on the basis of tighter and more cohesive clusters of archaeological remains, is presented by Merino-Pelaz & Cobo-Sánchez (2026).
Evidence of utility of the study of nonmetric traits at the enamel-dentine junction for distinguishing teeth of Neanderthals and modern humans is presented by Becam, Chevalier & Colard (2026).
Kanis et al. (2026) identify amino acid changes in the growth hormone receptor of Neanderthals, including a change driving faster cell growth, and report evidence of more muscle mass in modern humans who inherited the gene encoding the Neanderthal growth hormone receptor through admixture.
Zhang et al. (2026) present a new method for identification of evidence of archaic ancestry in modern human genomes, and report evidence of an introgression from an unknown archaic lineage into the ancestors of modern humans before their migration out of Africa.
Evidence of effectiveness of the imputation in detection of Neanderthal and Denisovan ancestry in low-coverage ancient genomes is presented by Capodiferro et al. (2026) .
Hublin et al. (2026) report the discovery of new, approximately 773,000-years-old hominin fossils from Grotte à Hominidés at Thomas Quarry I in Casablanca (Morocco), close in age to Homo antecessor but morphologically distinct from members of this species, preserving a combination of primitive and derived traits seen in Eurasian archaic hominins and in Homo sapiens.
Evidence from the study of a stratified sequence of lithic assemblages ranging from Acheulian to the Middle Stone Age from the Amanzi Springs archaeological site (South Africa), indicative of emergence of the Middle Stone Age in the studied area around 230,000 years ago, is presented by Blackwood et al. (2026).
Evidence of consistent and specialized extraction of hornfels for the production of stone tools between 220,000 and 110,000 years ago is reported from the Jojosi site (South Africa) by Will et al. (2026).
Beyene et al. (2026) report the discovery of approximately 100,000-years-old human skeletons and Middle Stone Age artifacts from the Halibee member of the Dawaitoli Formation (Ethiopia), interpreted as preserved in a wooded depositional environment with seasonal flooding.
Zimmer et al. (2026) interpret the morphological variation of Middle Stone Age human mandibles from the Klasies River Main Site (South Africa) as not conclusively indicative of presence of more than one population lineage.
García-Morato et al. (2026) reconstruct climate and vegetation changes in southern Africa from Marine Isotope Stage 5 to Marine Isotope Stage 3, and find that the emergence of the 76,000-67,000-years-old Stilbaai lithic technocomplex coincided with humid, cool phase that likely supported high biomass and expanded habitable zones, while the 64,000-60,000 years of Howiesons Poort technocomplex arose and ended during peaks of aridity, with a wetter interval midway through them.
Evidence from the study of engraved ostrich eggshell fragments from the Howiesons Poort technocomplex, indicating that the studied engravings represent an expression of complex graphic representation by Middle Stone Age humans, is presented by Decembrini et al. (2026).
Alichane et al. (2026) study the morphology of the enamel-dentine junction of the first and second molars in hominins associated with the Middle Stone Age Aterian technocomplexes in northwestern Africa, reporting evidence of overall closer morphological similarity to anatomically modern humans than to Neanderthals, but also evidence of morphological differences that might be related to the age and large size of the studied teeth.
Evidence of application of poison derived from plants (likely from Boophone disticha) on the tips of 60,000-years-old arrowhead from the Umhlatuzana Rock Shelter (South Africa) is presented by Isaksson, Högberg & Lombard (2026).
Review of research on the origin and on the course of global spread of Homo sapiens out of Africa from the preceding years is published by Groucutt (2026).
Pantoja-Pérez et al. (2026) identify dental and bone abnormalities in the mandible of Qafzeh 25 as likely caused by sharp object trauma, and report evidence of survival of the studied individual after the injury.
Litov, Ben-Dor & Barkai (2026) interpret the decline of use of in heavy-duty tools in Levant after the Lower-Middle Paleolithic transition, coinciding with decline of megaherbivores in the studied region, as indicating that the studied tools were primarily used for processing of large prey.
Abbas et al. (2026) provide evidence from the study of riverine wetland environments from the Hamra Faddan and Wadi al-Hasa localities from the eastern margin of the Jordan Rift Valley interpreted as indicating that southern Levant provided a stable environmental niche that sustained human populations from the late Middle Paleolithic to the Upper Paleolithic.
Zhao et al. (2026) study the morphology of hominin limb bones from the Salawusu site (China), finding no evidence of diagnostic features of the Neanderthal lineage, and reporting morphological evidence consistent with affinities with modern humans.
Li et al. (2026) report evidence from the study of the palynological record from the East China Sea continental shelf spanning the past 71,000 years indicative of presence of a cool, dry temperate grassland biome during the lowstand intervals (including the Last Glacial Maximum), as well as evidence of presence of an open-forest landscape during the milder conditions of the Marine Isotope Stage 3, and interpret their findings as supporting the interpretation of the exposed East China Sea continental shelf as a habitat facilitating the initial dispersal of early modern humans into East Asia.
Zhang et al. (2026) study the features of stone tools from the Nwya Devu site (China), reporting evidence of differences from stone tool assemblages from northern Initial Upper Paleolithic sites, and interpret tools from the Nwya Devu site as either representing a regional variant of Initial Upper Paleolithic technology or resulting from a separate dispersal of blade technologies into East Asia.
Totsuka et al. (2026) reconstruct the chronology of early Upper Paleolithic sites in Japan, and report evidence of rapid increase in the number of sites between 36,000 and 34,000 years ago that was likely linked to growth of the human population size.
Oktaviana et al. (2026) provide age estimates for Pleistocene rock art (hand stencils, human figures and non-figurative, geometric motifs) from southeastern Sulawesi (Indonesia) and determine the calcite overlying a hand stencil from Liang Metanduno on Muna Island to be at least 67,800 years old, representing the oldest demonstrated minimum-age constraints for parietal art worldwide reported to date, and interpreted as the oldest known archaeological evidence for the presence of Homo sapiens in Wallacea.
Ruff et al. (2026) describe a Late Pleistocene human femur from Wajak (Java, Indonesia), calculate body mass and stature of the studied individual and compare them with data on other Late Pleistocene individuals from East Asia, reporting evidence of greater body mass and relative body breadth in individuals from higher latitudes.
Borreggine et al. (2026) reconstruct likely timing and paths of early human migration from Sundaland into Sahul, and find northern routes of migration to be more likely than southern when changes of sea level and ocean currents are taken into account.
Evidence of exploitation of a broad range of resources by humans occupying the Inumaki Cave on Biak (Indonesia) during the Last Glacial Maximum is presented by Tolla et al. (2026).
Allen et al. (2026) study the visibility of fallow deer in broad-leaved woodland environment, and interpret purported hunting lesions on fossil bones of fallow deer as placed in areas that would be visible to Palaeolithic hunters in such environments.
Evidence indicating that Aurignacian artifacts from cave sites in southwestern Germany were adorned with geometric sign sequences of comparable complexity to that of early proto-cuneiform is presented by Bentz & Dutkiewicz (2026).
Conard, Janas & Zeidi (2026) report the discovery of two Aurignacian bird figurines made from mammoth ivory in the Hohle Fels cave (Germany).
Isle de Beauchaine et al. (2026) study the morphology of teeth in the Aurignacian mandible Les Rois 2 from the Les Rois cave (Charente, France), interpreted as consistent with assignment of the specimen to an anatomically modern human.
Röding et al. (2026) study the morphology of the Late Pleistocene frontal bone from Hahnöfersand (Germany) described by Bräuer (1980), interpret it as falling within the variability of Holocene Homo sapiens, and find no evidence of a morphology intermediate between those of Neanderthals and modern humans.
Bossoms Mesa et al. (2026) report evidence of preservation of human DNA in pigment samples collected in and around Paleolithic rock art, including preservation of DNA resulting from deposition through direct human contact in the Escoural Cave (Portugal).
A study on the age of the carbonate thin layers covering or underlying rock art from the Cave of Altamira (Spain), providing evidence of several periods of cave art from the ceiling of the studied cave, is published by Pons-Branchu et al. (2026).
Evidence from the Velika Pećina, Velika Vranovica and Pećina kod Stene cave sites (Serbia), indicative of human presence in central Balkans during the Last Glacial Maximum, is presented by Kuhn et al. (2026).
Masojć et al. (2026) describe a Late Pleistocene human tooth from the Khutul Usny Cave site, representing the first fossil of an early Homo sapiens in Mongolia with secure geological context and providing evidence of presence of the species in southern Mongolia around the onset of the Last Glacial Maximum.
A study on the frontal and mandibular morphology of the Red Deer Cave people, interpreted as consistent of affinities with Homo sapiens and indicative of diversity cranial morphology of late Pleistocene hominins from eastern Asia, is published by Fan et al. (2026).
Evidence indicating that Solutrean artifacts from the Peña Capón rock shelter (Muriel-Tamajón, Spain) were sourced 600 to 700 kilometers away from this site, in the present-day territory of southwest France, is presented by Sánchez de la Torre et al. (2026).
Nash et al. (2026) report rediscovery of putative Upper Paleolithic cave art from the Bacon Hole site (Wales, United Kingdom) originally discovered by William Sollas and Henri Breuil in 1912 and support the interpretation of the studied horizontal lines as cave art.
Reiche et al. (2026) determine the age of the carbon black-based figures in the rock art from the Font-de-Gaume cave (France) on the basis of chemical imaging and radiocarbon dating.
Parfitt et al. (2026) identify an Upper Paleolithic pendant made out of a polished seal tooth from the Kents Cavern (United Kingdom), which was an inland site during the Magdalenian occupation.
Allaby et al. (2026) reconstruct the environment of the Southern River system in southern Doggerland on the basis of sedimentological and sedimentary ancient DNA, and report evidence indicating that early colonization of Doggerland was facilitated by presence of northern refugia during the early Mesolithic.
Evidence indicating that early Paleo-Indians from eastern Beringia, North American Clovis complex and South American Fishtail Projectile Point complex were dietary specialists feeding on Pleistocene megafauna is presented by Potter et al. (2026).
Eren et al. (2026) argue that Pleistocene sites in North America with proboscidean remains associated with Clovis points representing hunting and scavenging events cannot be reliably distinguished on the basis of available evidence, and argue that Clovis foragers likely practiced both hunting and scavenging of large Pleistocene mammals.
Evidence from the study of assemblages of Pleistocene perishable objects from the Cougar Mountain Cave and Paisley Caves (Oregon, United States), indicative of complexity and sophistication of perishable technologies in the North American Great Basin during the Late Pleistocene, is presented by Rosencrance et al. (2026).
Carrillo-Briceño et al. (2026) report evidence of exploitation of glyptodonts, ground sloth, proboscideans, macraucheniids and toxodontids by Pleistocene humans from the Taima-Taima site (Venezuela).
Eren et al. (2026) provide estimates for the first appearance of the atlatl in western North America on the basis of analysis of the archaeological record, and find no evidence supporting atlatl use by foragers from the Clovis culture.
Pettigrew et al. (2026) report evidence from naturalistic experiments indicating that the atlatl was able to deliver fatal wounds to megafauna, including animals as large as mammoths.
He et al. (2026) reconstruct the course of peopling of East Asia and subsequent diversification of populations from the studied area during the Paleolithic and Neolithic on the basis of data from Y chromosome genomic data from ancient and modern individuals.
Zhang et al. (2026) sequence genomes of individuals from the Donghulin site in the North China Plain, and report evidence of population changes over two millennia during the Paleolithic-Neolithic transition.
A partial humerus with morphological affinities with Late Upper Paleolithic modern humans is described from early Holocene strata from Heilongjiang (China) by Wei et al. (2026).
Bourgon et al. (2026) report evidence from zinc stable isotope analysis of tooth enamel of humans from the late Pleistocene and Holocene sites from Sri Lanka indicative of a mixed diet including both animal and plant foods, with the plant component of the diet increasing over time (even before the introduction of crop agriculture).
Watanabe et al. (2026) report evidence from the study of genomes of the Jōmon people indicative of their descent from Upper Paleolithic continental East Asian populations that settled the Japanese archipelago between 27,000 and 19,000 years ago, and evidence of cold adaptation in the Jōmon lineage.
Evidence from the study of stone tool assemblages from the Buhais Rockshelter (United Arab Emirates) indicative of repeated occupation of the studied area between 210,000 and 16,000 years ago (including in the time of overall increased aridity of the Arabian Peninsula between 60,000 and 16,000 years ago) is presented by Bretzke et al. (2026).
Evidence from the study of Natufian artefacts and rock art from the Sahout site and the neighbouring sites of Jebel Arnaan and Jebel Misma (Saudi Arabia), indicative of occupation of the studied area by communities interacting with people from the Fertile Crescent during the terminal Pleistocene and early Holocene, is presented by Shipton et al. (2026).
Davin et al. (2026) report the discovery of clay ornaments from Natufian (late Epipalaeolithic) sites in Israel, interpreted as produced both by adults and by children, and representing the earliest known clay ornamental tradition outside of Europe.
Evidence of importance of consumption of lizards and snakes in subsistence strategies of Natufian foragers from the El Wad site (Israel) is presented by Lev, Weinstein-Evron & Yeshurun (2026).
Evidence of intentional pyre cremation at the HOR-1 site (Malawi) approximately 9500 years before present, representing the oldest adult pyre cremation in the world reported to date, is presented by Cerezo-Román et al. (2026).
Chritz et al. (2026) reconstruct the subsistence of foragers and herders from eastern Africa living from 9500 to 230 years before present on the basis of isotopic values of their tooth enamel and bone collagen, reporting evidence dietary diversity in fisher-foragers and in earliest pastoralists from the Turkana Basin (Kenya), and evidence that specialized pastoralist diets happened approximately 1000 years after the introduction of domestic livestock.
Martin et al. (2026) reconstruct the human population history in northeastern Africa on the basis of the study of the morphology of bony labyrinths of Late Pleistocene and Holocene individuals, reporting evidence of overall biological discontinuity between foragers and Neolithic food producers in the Middle Nile Valley, but also evidence of limited, localized instances of admixture or continuity between the two groups.
Surovell et al. (2026) provide new information on the age of the purported pre-Clovis site Monte Verde II (Chile), and argue that the site cannot be older than the middle Holocene.
The first molecular evidence of HPV16 in ancient anatomically modern humans is reported from the study of ancient DNA of the Ust'-Ishim man and Ötzi by Yazigi et al. (2026).
Balzeau et al. (2026) provide a direct comparison between brain and endocast characteristics in the same individuals on the basis of data from the study of 75 volunteers, reporting the discovery of endocranial marks unrelated to cerebral sulci, and propose a new standardised approach to the study of fossil endocasts and reconstruction of brains of fossil hominins.
Review of virtual anatomy methods used in paleoanthropological studies is published by Aramendi & de Jager (2026).
A new method for reconstruction of missing landmarks in the studies of hominin long bones is presented by Courtenay & Aramendi (2026).
Keevil et al. (2026) provide measurement data from bone surface modifications resulting from simulated stone tool and percussive butchery, carnivore feeding trials and ungulate trampling, facilitating identification of bone modifications in the studies on the origin and evolution of human carnivory.
RodentsRodent research
A study on the fossil record of Asian rodents spanning the last 55 million years, providing evidence of impact of tectonic and climatic changes on ecomorphological diversity of Asian rodent assemblages throughouth their evolutionary history, is published by Peng & Hopkins (2026).
Pfaff, Ruf & Le Maître (2026) determine the locomotory behavior of extinct members of Eusciurida on the basis of the study of middle and inner ear of extant and extinct rodents, interpreting early rodents and sciurids as fossorial, with adaptations to arboreal lifestyle evolving in later taxa.
Wei et al. (2026) reconstruct the evolutionary history of marmots on the basis of paleontological and molecular data.
Murchie et al. (2026) report evidence of preservation of ancient environmental DNA of diverse Quaternary organisms from eastern Beringia in the Pleistocene and Holocene ground squirrel coprolites from Yukon (Canada), including evidence of previously unrecognized genetic diversity of Arctic members of the genus Urocitellus.
Li, Bi & Li (2026) present the first virtual endocasts of Paleogene ctenodactyloids Exmus mini and Bounomys ulantatalensis.
The first fossil material of Hystrix subcristata from Taiwan is reported from the Pleistocene Chiting Formation by Halaçlar & Lin (2026).
Buldrini et al. (2026) describe fossil material of Phugatherium sp. from the Pliocene strata of Mininco Formation (Chile), extending known distribution of capybaras west of the Andes.
Selvatici et al. (2026) determine a previously unidentified mummified animal from the Homestake Gulch site (Yukon, Canada) as a late Holocene (approximately 3000-years-old) New World porcupine, report the recovery of the first complete ancient mitochondrial genome of a member of this species, and interpret this finding as evidence of appearance of the New World porcupines in the studied area after the appearance of the boreal forest in the aftermath of the Last Glacial Period.
Carrillo et al. (2026) study the evolutionary history of caviomorph rodents on the basis of data from extant and extinct members of the group, providing evidence of different trajectories of taxonomic and morphological diversification of Chinchilloidea and Octodontoidea.
Evidence from the study of tooth wear of caviomorph rodents from the Paleogene strata of the Shapaja in Peruvian Amazonia, indicative of diverse dietary strategies of the studied rodents, is presented by Robinet et al. (2026).
Delinschi et al. (2026) confirm the validity of Sarmatosminthus gabuniai on the basis of the analysis of fossil material from Vallesian sites in Moldova, Romania and Ukraine.
A study on the evolution of incisors of Eocene-Oligocene muroid rodents from Balkanatolia is published by van de Weerd et al. (2026).
Lopatin (2026) describes fossil material of members of the family Platacanthomyidae from the Pleistocene strata from Vietnam, including the first known fossil material of the Chapa pygmy dormouse and Typhlomys taxuansis.
Rico & Terry (2026) identify skull traits that are best predictors of body length and weight of pack rats and reconstruct the evolution of body size of pack rats from the Paisley Caves (Oregon, United States) throughout the past 15,000 years.
Baca et al. (2026) reconstruct the evolutionary history of the field vole species complex based on data from modern mitogenomes and nuclear genomes and from ancient genomes of specimens spanning the last 75,000 years.
Alfaro-Ibáñez et al. (2026) study mitochondrial genomes of Pleistocene tundra voles from the El Mirón Cave (Spain), and identify a novel, extinct southern European haplogroup within this species.
Evidence from the study of molars of Stenocranius anglicus (European narrow-headed vole) from Middle Pleistocene to Holocene localities in Czech Republic and Slovakia, indicative of more pronounced morphological variation between populations from different sites than between stratigraphic stages and of long-term survival of the species in isolated populations, is presented by Dubjelová et al. (2026).
New fossil material of members of the genus Byzantinia, providing new information on the morphology of teeth of members of this genus and their evolution, is described from the Miocene strata of the Zahleh Formation (Lebanon) by López-Antoñanzas et al. (2026).
A study on the phylogenetic relationships and evolutionary history of extant and extinct hamsters is published by Dirnberger et al. (2026).
Bujalska et al. (2026) reconstruct the evolutionary history of European small hamsters on the basis of mitochondrial genomes from Late Pleistocene and Holocene remains from Central and Western Europe, the Balkans and Anatolia, identifying evidence of presence of the winter white dwarf hamster in Central Europe during the Late Pleistocene.
Pacheco-Castro, Carranza-Castañeda & Wang (2026) report the discovery of fossil material of Sigmodon minor from the Pliocene strata of the San Miguel de Allende Basin, representing the first record of the species from central Mexico and its southernmost known record in North America.
Other euarchontogliresMiscellaneous euarchontoglires research
Zhang & Wang (2026) revise and study the affinities of fossil lagomorphs from China.
A study on the anatomy and affinities of Gymnesicolagus gelaberti is published by Čermák et al. (2026).
Kalaitzi & Kostopoulos (2026) study the forelimb and hindlimb morphology of Trischizolagus dumitrescuae, interpreted as indicative of adaptations for controlled, agile leaping, as well as indicative of more developed running abilities compared to typical rabbits but without the extreme specialization seen in hares.
Chester et al. (2026) report the discovery of fossil material of Purgatorius from the Denver Formation (Colorado, United States), representing the first record of a Puercan plesiadapiform south of Montana reported to date.
Evidence from the study of virtual endocasts of extant and extinct members of Euarchontoglires, indicative of a shared ancestral endocranial shape in early members of the group, indicating that treeshrews are not a good model for the ancestral endocranial shape in Euarchontoglires, and indicating that primates evolved their modern endocranial morphologies faster than other members of Euarchontoglires, is presented by Lang et al. (2026)
LaurasiatheriansArtiodactylsCetaceansCetacean research
Peacock & Thewissen (2026) compare volume measurements of the bony labyrinth in extant mammals and Eocene cetaceans, and hypothesize that fossil cetaceans had membranous ducts of relatively larger size compared to terrestrial even-toed ungulates, and that vestibular organs of early cetaceans were necessary for terrestrial locomotion.
Buono et al. (2026) reconstruct changes of cetacean morphological diversity and ecospace occupancy throughout the evolutionary history of the group, identifying Eocene–Oligocene and Plio–Pleistocene transitions as periods of major evolutionary changes, and linking changes of ecospace occupancy to the main radiation events of the group.
Tyborowski et al. (2026) report the discovery of a portion of a dentary of an indeterminate member of Pelagiceti from the Siemień Formation, representing the first record of an Eocene whale from Poland and one of the smallest fully aquatic Eocene whales reported to date.
A deciduous tooth of a basilosaurid with evidence of malformation that might have been caused by localized stress is described from the Eocene Submeseta Formation (Seymour Island, Antarctica) by Bajor et al. (2026).
Hakkens, Reumer & Schulp (2026) study the affinities of the basilosaurid specimen TM 8501 from the Eocene (Priabonian) Yazoo Clay (Alabama, United States; the holotype of Zeuglodon hydrarchus), identify the studied individual as a mid-sized cetacean distinct from Dorudon serratus and Chrysocetus healyorum, an tentatively refer the specimen to Zygorhiza kochii.
Davydenko et al. (2026) report fossil evidence from the Pyvykha Mountain site (Ukraine) indicative of coexistence of archaeocetes of at least two different body size categories in the same locality during the middle Eocene, and interpret the studied cetaceans as likely to be close relatives of the ancestors of Neoceti.
Van Rompaey et al. (2026) describe fossil material of Brevirostrodelphis aff. dividum and Brevirostrodelphis sp. from the Berchem Formation (Belgium), providing evidence of presence of members of this genus in the North Sea Basin and their trans-Atlantic distribution during the Miocene, and reinterpret the type specimen of Phocaenopsis sheynensis as a specimen of Kentriodon sp.
The first porpoise fossil material from the western North Atlantic is reported from the Pliocene strata near Charleston (South Carolina, United States) by Kofranek et al. (2026).
Tanaka et al. (2026) report the first discovery of fossil material of a toothed whale from the Miocene (Burdigalian to Langhian) strata of the Korematsu Formation (Japan).
Buchholtz et al. (2026) report evidence of links between sternal shape and feeding behaviors in extant baleen whales, and reconstruct the transition from raptorial predation to filter feeding during the evolutionary history of baleen whales on the basis of the study of sternal morphology in extinct members of the group.
Strauch & Pyenson (2026) report the discovery of fossil material of cf. Salishicetus from the Oligocene or Miocene strata of the Vaqueros Formation (California, United States).
Agnolín, Bogan & Lucero (2026) consider Balaena pampaea, Notiocetus romerianus and N. platensis to be nomina dubia, interpreting the fossil material of N. platensis as remains of an indeterminate baleen whale, and interpreting fossils of B. pampaea and N. romerianus as remains of an indeterminate balaenid.
Lambert et al. (2026) report shark feeding traces on bones of cetacean specimens from the Pliocene Kattendijk Formation (Belgium), including evidence of a bluntnose sixgill shark feeding on a right whale Balaenella brachyrhynus and evidence of Carcharodon plicatilis feeding on a member of the genus Casatia.
López-Galán, Ferrón & Botella (2026) study ecomorphological variation of extant and extinct filter-feeding cetaceans, pachycormiform fishes and selachians, interpreting members of the three groups as repeatedly converging toward analogous functional designs, but also interpreting their convergent evolution as influenced by lineage-specific constraints.
Other artiodactylsOther artiodactyl research
Taxonomic revision and a study on biostratigraphy of oreodonts from the John Day region of Oregon (United States) is published by Emery-Wetherell, Famoso & Samuels (2026).
Review of the fossil record and evolutionary history of South American camelids is published by Castillo, Corti & Samaniego (2026).
Evidence of stability of the morphology locomotor traits in the astragali of camelids and antilocaprids from the Dove Spring Formation in spite of environmental changes in the Miocene is presented by Hardy & Kort (2026).
Arranz et al. (2026) revise the composition of the Miocene (Vallesian) suid assemblage from the Can Llobateres 1 locality (Vallès-Penedès Basin, Spain).
Siarabi et al. (2026) describe new fossil material of Propotamochoerus palaeochoerus from the Miocene strata from els Hostalets de Pierola (Spain), study the phylogenetic relationships of this species, and determine the first appearance of P. palaeochoerus in the Vallès-Penedès Basin to predate the earliest record of hipparionins by approximately 50,000 years.
The best preserved skull of a male specimen of Sus lydekkeri reported to date is described from the Pleistocene strata from the Jinyuan Cave (Liaoning, China) by Dong et al. (2026), who also report evidence of overlap of intraspecific variation of Sus lydekkeri, Sus peii, Sus strozzi and the wild boar.
A study on the phylogenetic relationships of extant and extinct ruminants, and on the impact of increased fossil taxon sampling on the results of analyses of timing of ruminant evolution, is published by Till & Smith (2026).
Evidence of presence of fossil material of seven ruminant taxa at the Pliocene site of Jradzor (Armenia) is presented by Bukhsianidze (2026).
Hartung & Böhme (2026) study changes in the skull of Dorcatherium naui during its ontogeny, interpreted as suggestive of similarities of life history characteristics of the studied tragulid and extant water chevrotain.
Piprek, Rams-Pociecha & Mizia (2026) consider evidence from the study of extant and extinct pecoran ruminants to be insufficient to definitively resolve the question whether the cranial appendages share a common evolutionary origin or whether they evolved independently in multiple pecoran lineages.
A study on tooth enamel histology of Eotragus noyei and Procervulus cf. dichotomus from the Miocene site of els Casots (Vallès-Penedès Basin, Spain), providing probable evidence of fast life histories of the studied ungulates, is published by Cuccu et al. (2026).
Magoulick & Marshall (2026) interpret lack of dispersal of pronghorns into South America during the Great American Interchange as most likely linked to lack to suitable climatic conditions in potential dispersal corridors.
A study on the limb bone histology and life history of Ampelomeryx ginsburgi is published by Viladot et al. (2026).
Quaranta et al. (2026) reconstruct the biogeographical history of giraffids on the basis of the Miocene to Holocene fossil record.
Al Riaydh et al. (2026) study the assemblage of giraffid astragali from upper Miocene-Pliocene As-Sahabi deposits (Libya), and identify fossil material of two species of Samotherium (S. major and S. boissieri) that likely differed in habitat preferences.
Tsatsalis & van der Geer (2026) reconstruct life histories of Pleistocene Axis lydekkeri and Duboisia santeng from Java (Indonesia), reporting evidence of high juvenile mortality and evidence of survival after senescence.
Evidence from the study of the isotopic composition of tooth enamel of deer and Alpine ibex from the Melitzia Cave (Greece), indicative of presence of a Late Pleistocene refugium in the Mani Peninsula, is presented by Tzortzi et al. (2026).
Evidence of a flexible dietary niche of reindeer living in Europe from Marine Isotope Stage 5a to Marine Isotope Stage 2 is presented by Hemmingham, Pappa & Schreve (2026).
New fossil material of Sinomegaceros ordosianus, providing new information on the morphology of members of this species, is described from the Pleistocene strata from the Yitong River basin (China) by Zhang & Wang (2026).
Rocha-Méndez et al. (2026) report evidence from the study of mitochondrial genomes of European fallow deers from the Neumark-Nord sites (Germany) indicative of loss of genetic diversity of the species since the Pleistocene, recovering the studied extinct population from a single Eemian locality with as much genetic diversity as seen in extant population with a Eurasian range.
Chung & Cho (2026) describe new antler remains of Elaphurus formosanus from the Pleistocene of Taiwan and support recognition of the species as distinct.
Amanova, Drucker & Fontana (2026) reconstruct the ecology and habitat use of red deers from the Epigravettian sequence of Riparo Tagliente (Italy) on the basis of the study of carbon and oxygen isotopic composition of their tooth enamel, reporting evidence of a diet based on C3 plants and life in the landscape dominated by open woodland environments.
Kubo, Yamazaki & Taniguchi (2026) reconstruct the diet of early to mid-Holocene sika deers from the Iyai Rockshelter Site (Japan) on the basis of the study on their tooth wear texture, reporting evidence of abrasive food in their diets and short-term temporal changes in foraging conditions.
Martínez-Polanco (2026) determines diet of extant Neotropical deer (including local dietary variation within species) on the basis of the study of their tooth wear, providing reference data that can be used to determine diets of fossil deer and other small- to medium-sized ungulates.
Evidence from the study of tooth wear of extant and Pleistocene springboks, indicative of variability of dietary signals in members of the same species both within and across different biomes, is presented by Walls et al. (2026).
Dumitru et al. (2026) determine that deposition of fossils of Myotragus antiquus in Cova des Fum (Mallorca, Spain) happened between 3.60 and 3.45 million years ago, indicating that M. antiquus lived years earlier than indicated by previous estimates.
Armaroli et al. (2026) provide new information on the late Pleistocene Alpine ibex population from Riparo Dalmeri (Italy) on the basis of the study of strontium, carbon and oxygen isotopic composition of their remains, ancient DNA data and radiocarbon dating, reporting evidence of stable density of the studied population despite intensive hunting and consistent human presence, as well as evidence dietary differences between sexes in the studied population.
Sorbelli et al. (2026) describe fossil material of "Alephis" tigneresi from the Pliocene strata from Camp dels Ninots (Spain), and assign this species to the genus Parabos.
Liang et al. (2026) study the phylogenetic relationships of Bubalus mephistopheles and Bubalus wansjocki on the basis of data from mitochondrial genomes, and argue that the studied water buffaloes might represent the same species and be a part of the sister group of extant anoa.
Oppenheimer et al. (2026) reconstruct the population history of the American bison on the basis of data from modern and ancient individual living within the last 20,000 years.
Al Riaydh, Merceron & Lehmann (2026) determine the taxonomic composition of the assmeblage of bovid astragali and phalanx bones from the Miocene-Pliocene site of As-Sahabi (Libya), interpreted as indicative of predominantly open environments that also included lightly wooded and forested areas.
Kelly & Alemseged (2026) interpret the morphology of the astragali of bovids from Member G of the Shungura Formation (Ethiopia) as indicative of presence of taxa adapted to environments with varying vegetation cover, and interpret their findings as indicative of short-term fluctuations in environmental conditions.
Evidence of preservation of ancient DNA in Pleistocene bovid remains from South Africa that are between approximately 50,000 and 12,000 years old is presented by de Jager et al. (2026).
Evidence from dental microwear texture analysis, indicating that members of the genus Archaeotherium representing different morphotypes and size classes occupied different dietary niches, is presented by Wooten & DeSantis (2026).
Ducrocq et al. (2026) describe new fossil material of Anthracokeryx naduongensis, Bothriogenys vietnamensis and B. langsonensis from the Eocene strata from the Na Duong coal mine (Vietnam), and emend the diagnoses of the studied species.
Scribano et al. (2026) compare the postcranial anatomy of Libycosaurus bahri and Hexaprotodon garyam from the Miocene strata from Toros-Menalla (Chad), and establish an anatomical framework for the identification of postcranial remains of anthracotheres and hippopotamids.
A study on tooth anomalies in specimens of Hippopotamus cf. gorgops from the Olduvai Gorge (Tanzania), interpreted as consistent with traumatic displacement likely linked to aggressive interactions and with reactions to seasonal environmental fluctuations, is published by Fidalgo et al. (2026).
Martino et al. (2026) study the cranial phenotypic diversity of hippopotamid material from Ortona (Italy) and related specimens from the Pleistocene of Central and Western Europe, identifying two morphotypes of Hippopotamus antiquus and reporting evidence of significant sexual dimorphism in mandibles of specimens from Maglianella (Italy).
Marra (2026) studies morphological variation of Pleistocene hippopotamids from Sicily and Malta, and finds no evidence of presence of additional hippopotamid taxa besides Hippopotamus pentlandi in Sicily.
Radović et al. (2026) identify fossil material of a hippopotamus or a related taxon from the Grebci karst area (Bosnia and Herzegovina), representing the first confirmed finding of a member of the genus Hippopotamus in southeastern Europe outside Greece.
Martino, Di Patti & Pandolfi (2026) revise the postcranial remains of hippopotamids from the San Ciro Cave (Sicily, Italy), providing evidence of presence of at least two species with different environmental adaptations (Hippopotamus pentlandi and the hippopotamus).
Evidence of grazing-oriented diet in Hippopotamus pentlandi is presented by Martino et al. (2026).
Gerakakis et al. (2026) describe new fossil material of Hippopotamus creutzburgi from the Katharo Plateau (Crete, Greece), providing evidence of anatomical differences between its skull and the skull of its mainland relatives other that smaller size, as well as evidence of sexual dimorphism in the mandible.
CarnivoransCarnivoran research
Evidence of impact of competition on diversification of North American and Eurasian carnivorans throughout the last 45 million years is presented by Porto & Quental (2026).
A study on the mandibles of extant and extinct carnivorans, providing evidence of overall decoupling of evolution of mandible shape and function, but also possible evidence of modular dynamics in the evolution of mandible, with differences in the pace and correlation of evolution of different anatomical regions, is published by Sansalone et al. (2026).
Bartolini-Lucenti et al. (2026) document new occurrences of carnivorans in the Pliocene strata from the Jradzor locality (Armenia), including Baranogale helbingi, Chasmaporthetes lunensis, Pliocrocuta perrieri and cf. Lynx sp., expanding known geographic and temporal ranges of the studied carnivorans.
Orcutt et al. (2026) report the discovery of new carnivoran fossil material from the John Day Formation (Oregon, United States), including the first definitive records of Osbornodon sp. and Otarocyon sp. from the studied formation, as well as a possible fossil material of a large amphicyonine.
Espinasa et al. (2026) study the composition of the Rancholabrean carnivoran assemblage from the Calera cave system (San Luis Potosí, Mexico), including a growth sequence of Smilodon fatalis.
Díaz de León-Muñoz, Siliceo & Ferreira (2026) study the feeding behavior of Magericyon anceps, reporting evidence of resistance of its mandible to loads during hunting, but also evidence of an unexpectedly weak bite.
Evidence from the study of the fossil record of canids from the John Day Formation, indicative of stronger links of dietary behavior of the studied canids (as indicated by tooth wear) with lineage duration than with tooth morphology, is presented by Tanis, DeSantis & Terry (2026).
Kort, Cavin & Wang (2026) describe the anatomy of the postcranial skeleton of Mesocyon coryphaeus, finding no evidence of cursorial adaptations seen in later canids, and interpret the studied canid as a likely ambush predator.
Kropczyk & Marciszak (2026) report the discovery of fossil material of the corsac fox from the late Pleistocene strata from the Rogóżka Cave (Poland).
Frosali et al. (2026) interpret the shape and size of the frontal sinus in Canis etruscus, Canis mosbachensis and Canis borjgali as primarily influenced by the ecology of the studied canids, and interpret the morphology of the frontal sinus of the latter two species as indicative of higher proportion of meat in their diets compared to C. etruscus.
Lyubimov & Sablin (2026) report pathological modifications in a mandible of Canis etruscus from the Pleistocene strata from the Muhkai 2 locality (Dagestan, Russia) identified as a fully healed displaced mandibular fracture, and interpret the survival of the studied individual as a likely evidence of sociality and conspecific care in C. etruscus.
Blázquez-Orta et al. (2026) study the fossil material of Early and Middle Pleistocene canids from the Atapuerca Mountains (Spain), interpret the morphology of the studied fossils as consistent with a gradual transition from Canis mosbachensis to the wolf, and determine the observed morphological changes to coincide with a climatic shift.
Evidence from the study of tooth wear in late Pleistocene wolves from Britain, indicative of dietary shifts related to climate and environmental changes, is presented by Burtt et al. (2026).
Micucci et al. (2026) compare the lengths and widths of carnassial teeth and overall body mass of Pleistocene grey wolves from eastern Beringia and recent Canadian individuals, find no evidence of significant body size differences between Pleistocene Yukon wolves and modern Canadian ones when accounting for sample size differences, and interpret Pleistocene Yukon wolves and modern Canadian wolves as belonging to the same ecotype, different from larger Pleistocene wolves from Alaska and Siberia.
Evidence from the study of nuclear and mitochondrial genomes Paleolithic dog remains, indicative of presence and wide distribution of a genetically homogeneous dog population across Europe and Anatolia by at least 14,300 years ago, is presented by Marsh et al. (2026).
Bergström et al. (2026) reconstruct the evolutionary history of early European dogs on the basis of the study of ancient DNA from Paleolithic and Mesolithic remains, reporting evidence of genetic diversification of European dogs before 14,200 years ago, and evidence of contribution of Mesolithic dogs to the ancestry of later, Neolithic European dogs.
Purported partial dentary of a member of the genus Plionarctos from the Miocene Rattlesnake Formation (Oregon, United States) is considered to be only identifiable as belonging to an indeterminate bear by Schubert & Samuels (2026), who consider Plionarctos edensis from the latest Hemphillian Mt. Eden Local Fauna from California to be oldest known confirmed short-faced bear.
Ruiz-Ramoni et al. (2026) identify fossil material of a specimen of Arctotherium wingei from Taima-Taima (Venezuela), find A. wingei to be the only species of Arctotherium present in the region, and review the fossil record of bears in Venezuela.
Lopatin et al. (2026) describe molars of Helarctos malayanus praemalayanus from the Pleistocene strata of the Tham Hai Cave (Vietnam), and interpret the fossil record from Southeast Asia as indicative of larger body size of Middle Pleistocene sun bears compared to their extant relatives.
Gutiérrez-Carbajal et al. (2026) reconstruct the evolutionary history of cave bears from southwestern Europe on the basis of data from enamel proteomic analysis, recovering Ursus dolinensis as a basal member of the cave bear lineage.
Kochnev et al. (2026) study the variation of the size and shape of the hard palate and choanae of Ursus kanivetz and Ursus rossicus, and report possible evidence of a link between the hard palate form and the climate.
A study on the ecology of cave bears from Galería 1 inside the Cueva de Guantes (Palencia, Spain) as indicated by isotopic composition of tooth enamel and bone collagen is published by Rodríguez-Franco et al. (2026).
Hasegawa et al. (2026) study the distribution of brown bears in the Japanese Archipelago during the Late Pleistocene, reporting remains of exceptionally large individuals from Aomori, Nagano, Shizuoka and Oita.
Estraviz-López et al. (2026) study the fossil record of Pleistocene brown bears from Portugal, reporting evidence of presence of robust individuals with features convergent with cave bears and some of the largest brown bears in the fossil record reported to date, as well as evidence of size reduction during the Holocene that might have been linked to human pressure and habitat destruction.
Evidence from the study of mandibles of Pleistocene and Holocene browns bears, indicative of differences of masticatory adaptations of bears from warm and cold areas regardless of their geological age, is presented by van Heteren & Villalba de Alvarado (2026).
Johnson et al. (2026) report the recovery of ancient DNA from the early Holocene glacial lake sediments in northern Sweden representing the oldest record of brown bear in the region reported to date, and report evidence of affinities of the studied individual with the southern population of Scandinavian brown bears, possibly indicating that the individual migrated northward from its birthplace.
Evidence of a predominantly herbivorous diet of early Holocene brown bears from the Hattab II and Kehf el-Hammar sites (Morocco) is presented by Iken et al. (2026).
Description of new fossil material of Trochotherium cyamoides from La Grive-Saint-Alban (France) and Kleineisenbach (Germany) and a study on the anatomy and affinities of members of this species is published by Sánchez-Hernández et al. (2026), who interpret T. cyamoides as a member of the stem group of Mephitidae that might have fed on terrestrial gastropods.
Evidence from the study of the pelvis and hindlimbs of Cyonasua, indicative of morphological similarities to bones of scansorial and terrestrial generalist carnivorans such as members of the genera Galictis, Meles and Arctictis, is presented by Tarquini et al. (2026).
Tseng (2026) describes the first known partial skeleton of Leptarctus wortmani from the Hemphillian strata from the Rome Beds (Oregon, United States), providing evidence of morphology of the postcranial skeleton similar to those of extant badgers belonging to the genus Meles.
Lopatin et al. (2026) describe a molar of a member of the genus Mellivora from the Pleistocene strata from the Tham Hai Cave, representing the first known record of Mellivorinae in Southeast Asia.
A new specimen of Cernictis hesperus, providing new information on the anatomy of members of this species, is described from the (probably late Hemphillian) strata of the Pinole Tuff Formation (California, United States) by Tseng (2026).
Sotnikova et al. (2026) report the discovery of new fossil material of large-bodied wolverines from the Pleistocene strata from the Indigirka River basin and New Siberia (Sakha Republic, Russia), and interpret their large size as likely to be physiological adaptation to the mammoth steppe environment.
Rule et al. (2026) study the evolution of amphibious hearing in pinnipeds on the basis of data from extant and extinct representatives of the group and their relatives, link its evolution to the evolution of cavernous tissue in pinniped ear canal and middle ear, and report evidence of presence of amphibious hearing in the last common ancestor of "enaliarctines" and modern pinnipeds but not in more basal members of the pinniped stem group.
The first pinniped fossil from Taiwan (a femur of a member of the genus Zalophus from the Pleistocene strata from the bottom of the Taiwan Strait) is described by Sun et al. (2026).
Dewaele et al. (2026) study the long bone variability of extant earless seals, finding no evidence of consistently clear genus- or species-specific shapes, and note the need for reevaluation of validity of fossil taxa described on the basis of isolated long bones.
Postcranial earless seal bones with distinctive morphology are reported from the Miocene strata from Hrytsiv (Ukraine; the type locality of Planopusa semenovi) by Otriazhyi et al. (2026).
Dewaele (2026) revises the fossil record of earless seals from the Miocene strata of the Chesapeake Group (Maryland and Virginia, United States), reporting evidence of presence of three seal morphotypes in the studied fossil material.
Kargopoulos et al. (2026) revise the composition of the ictitheriine hyaenid assemblage from the Miocene strata from the Venta del Moro (Spain), reporting possible evidence of presence of a second species in addition to Hyaenictitherium wongii.
Kargopoulos et al. (2026) identify bite punctures in skulls of Adcrocuta eximia from the Miocene strata from the Torrentet dels Traginers site and Chasmaporthetes lunensis from the Pleistocene strata from the La Puebla de Valverde site (Spain), interpreted as possible evidence of intraspecific aggression.
A study on Pliocene coprolites from the Odesa catacombs (Ukraine), providing evidence of extensive bone and hair consumption by members of the genus Pliocrocuta interpreted as indicative of scavenging as primary feeding strategy, is published by Brachaniec et al. (2026).
Evidence of morphological changes in the skull of Pachycrocuta brevirostris from the Pleistocene strata from the Taurida Cave (Crimea) during its ontogeny is presented by Lavrov et al. (2026).
Evidence of increased adaptation of postcanine teeth of Pachycrocuta brevirostris to hypercarnivory and bone-cracking throughout the evolutionary history of the species is presented by Khantemirov et al. (2026).
Iannucci et al. (2026) report the discovery of fossil material of a hyena belonging to the genus Crocuta from the Pirro III site (Italy), and interpret this finding as indicative of presence of Middle Pleistocene deposits at Pirro Nord.
Khantemirov et al. (2026) study the morphology of teeth of late Pleistocene cave hyenas from the Tip-Tugai cave (Bashkortostan, Russia), and report differences in teeth morphology between Ural hyenas and most of the European ones which might be evidence of higher degree of adaptation to bone cracking in Ural hyenas.
Evidence from the study of remains of the spotted hyena from the Pleistocene strata from the San Teodoro Cave (Sicily, Italy), indicative of slightly smaller body size of the spotted hyaenas from Sicily compared to their contemporaries from mainland Europe, is presented by Iurino et al. (2026).
A nearly complete cranium of Adelphailurus kansensis, providing new information on the skull anatomy of members of this species, is described from the Hemphillian Big Sandy Formation (Arizona, United States) by Chatar & Tseng (2026).
Salesa et al. (2026) study the functional anatomy of the hindlimbs of Promegantereon ogygia, and report evidence of morphological similarities to hindlimbs of the early felid Proailurus lemanensis.
Evidence from the study of the neuroanatomy of Megantereon cultridens, interpreted as possibly indicative of scansorial adaptations, enhanced visual processing and preferences for closed environments, is presented by Meli et al. (2026).
Haji-Sheikh, Haji-Sheikh & Naples (2026) present new cranial endocasts of Smilodon fatalis, and calculate that the range of brain endocast volumes of the studied species overlaps with the published range of brain volumes of modern lions.
Evidence of utility of CT and MicroCT scans in determining the condition of tooth sockets in skulls of Smilodon fatalis from the La Brea Tar Pits, as well as in determining whether the canines of the studied specimens were correctly associated and correctly seated in tooth sockets during restoration of the skulls, is presented by Haji-Sheikh, Haji-Sheikh & Naples (2026).
Schmökel, Del Chicca & Hagen Argudin Pina (2026) identify pathologies in three vertebrae of Smilodon fatalis from the La Brea Tar Pits, interpreted as consistent with the diagnosis of a spinal nerve tumor.
Fernández-Jalvo et al. (2026) identify tooth marks of Smilodon on bones of Toxodon, Notiomastodon, Doedicurus, Glossotherium and Lestodon from the Pleistocene strata from the Salto de Piedra site (Argentina).
A felid mandible interpreted as the most definitive fossil material of Homotherium latidens from Anatolia reported to date is described from the Burdur Basin (Turkey) by Yavuz et al. (2026).
Nikolskiy et al. (2026) report the discovery of canines of Homotherium in the late Pleistocene strata from Suruktakh in the Kolyma River basin and from the Bolshoy Lyakhovsky Island (Russia), comfirming presence of members of this genus in northeastern Siberia approximately 41,500–37,500 years ago.
Reumer, de Vos & Wibowo (2026) interpret Hemimachairodus zwierzyckii from the Pleistocene strata from Sangiran (Java, Indonesia) as a junior synonym of Homotherium latidens.
Pérez et al. (2026) identify fossil material of lynxes from Serpenteko Leze de Mezkiritz pit (Navarre, Spain) as including remains of both the Iberian lynx and the Eurasian lynx, providing possible evidence of overlap of ranges of both species in northern Iberia around the Pleistocene–Holocene transition.
Witt, Hotchner & Meachen (2026) report that postcranial remains of Miracinonyx trumani and cougars can be reliably differentiated on the basis of their postcranial remains, and identify fossils of M. trumani from new localities in United States and Mexico.
Cassatt-Johnstone et al. (2026) determine Miracinonyx trumani to be the sister taxon of the cougar on the basis of data from high-coverage paleogenomes, identify three purported Pleistocene cougar individuals from Yukon (Canada) as individuals of M. trumani instead (extending known geographical range of the species), and report evidence of dietary differences between specimens of M. trumani from Yukon and Wyoming (United States).
Lyubimov et al. (2026) report the discovery of fossil material of Acinonyx pardinensis from the Muhkai 2 site (Dagestan, Russia), representing the first record of the species in the northeastern Caucasus.
Hemmer (2026) interprets Pleistocene Feliopsis palaeojavanica from the Trinil site (Indonesia) as a member of a previously unrecognized pantherine lineage that also included Miocene Pachypanthera piriyai, and interprets the studied felids as possible specialized crocodile hunters.
26 purported subfossil tiger specimens from Japan are reinterpreted as cave lions by Sun et al. (2026), indicating that cave lions were the Panthera lineage that colonized Japan during the Pleistocene.
Evidence from the study of genomes of cave lions living across a time series spanning over 100,000 years, indicating that cave and modern lions were distinct evolutionary lineages with independent histories, as well as indicative of extensive population connectivity of cave lions and indicative of interbreeding of modern lions (likely from southwestern Asia) with cave lions during the Late Pleistocene, is presented by Stanton et al. (2026).
Gedman et al. (2026) perform phylogenetic analyses based on paleogenomes generated from ancient DNA found in two specimens of dire wolves and report that the dire wolf lineage diverged from other canids around 4.5 million years ago, prior to the split between the black-backed jackal and other members of the subtribe Canina. Admixture analyses of the dire wolves' paleogenomes indicate hybridization between the lineage that led to the subtribe Cerdocyonina and the sister lineage to gray wolves, coyotes and dholes.
ChiropteransChiropteran research
Kaźmierkiewicz et al. (2026) reconstruct the evolutionary history of members of the genus Plecotus in Central Europe on the basis of data from ancient DNA from Pleistocene and Holocene fossils, and recover the paratype of Plecotus abeli as identical with extant brown long-eared bats.
EulipotyphlansEulipotyphlan research
Valenzuela et al. (2026) study the evolution of the postcranial skeleton in the lineage of Nesiotites from the Pliocene to the Holocene, reporting that members of the studied lineage underwent a size shift throughout their evolutionary history but retained adaptations to terrestrial generalist locomotion.
A study on the composition and evolution of Miocene erinaceid assemblages from the Daroca-Calamocha area (Spain) is published by Cailleux et al. (2026).
Cailleux (2026) identifies common dental pathologies in the fossil material of Galerix stehlini from the Miocene strata from La Grive-Saint-Alban (France), and interprets their recurrence as possibly linked to small population size linked to habitat fragmentation.
PerissodactylsPerissodactyl research
Tissier & Smith (2026) reconstruct the early evolutionary history of Perissodactyla on the basis of a new phylogenetic study, recovering purported horse relatives Hyracotherium and Pliolophus as not belonging to Hippomorpha, and reporting evidence of rapid dispersals of Pliolophus and Cardiolophus in the northern continents around the Paleocene–Eocene thermal maximum.
New fossil material of Ancylotherium hennigi, providing new information on the anatomy of members of this species, is described from the Plio-Pleistocene strata from Laetoli (Tanzania) by Harrison & Kwekason (2026).
Handa et al. (2026) describe rhinocerotid fossils from the Phra Phut sandpit (Thailand), interpreted as indicative of late Miocene age of the studied assemblage, and report evidence of similarity of composition of the studied assemblage and other late Miocene rhinocerotid assemblages from sandpits in Chaloem Phra Kiat District in Nakhon Ratchasima.
Sanisidro & Gutiérrez-Marco (2026) describe fossil material of Brachydiceratherium sp. from the Miocene strata of the Santalla Formation (Spain), representing the first large vertebrate from the El Bierzo Basin reported to date.
A study on deciduous teeth and juvenile skulls of members of the genus Chilotherium, providing evidence of utility of dental characters for species discrimination, is published by Kampouridis et al. (2026).
Pandolfi, Codrea & Solomon (2026) describe fossil material of a member of the genus Acerorhinus from the Miocene strata from the Crețești 1 site (Romania), with greatest similarity to A. simplex, and refine the species content of the genus Acerorhinus.
Titov et al. (2026) describe fossil material of Elasmotherium chaprovicum from the Pleistocene strata from the Taurida Cave (Crimea), including the first upper milk teeth of a member of the genus Elasmotherium reported to date.
Ponomarev et al. (2026) report the discovery of fossil material of Stephanorhinus kirchbergensis in the Pleistocene strata from the Komi Republic (Russia), representing the northernmost record of the species in Europe reported to date.
Uzunidis & Pandolfi (2026) report evidence of different dynamics of evolution of body mass of the narrow-nosed rhinoceros from Northern Europe and from the Mediterranean, as well as evidence of consistent mixed-feeding strategy in the studied species, with seasonal specialization toward either browsing or grazing in populations near the end of the temporal range of the species.
Uzunidis, Pandolfi & Brugal (2026) identify fossil material of the narrow-nosed rhinoceros at the Mas des Caves site (France) belonging to at least nine individuals from different size classes, and report evidence of similar plant selection by individuals of different age.
Guðjónsdóttir et al. (2026) sequence a high-coverage genome from woolly rhinoceros tissue preserved within the stomach of a permafrost-preserved wolf from Tumat (Sakha Republic, Russia) and reconstruct the evolutionary history of the woolly rhinoceros on the basis of genomic data from this and two other Siberian individuals, finding no evidence of genomic erosion or a prolonged reduction in population size before the extinction of the species.
Evidence from the study of morphology of petrosals and inner ears of fossil horses, indicating that the ear region is informative for the studied of phylogeny of odd-toed ungulates, is presented by Goodchild et al. (2026).
A study on the evolution of the shape of equid skulls is published by Wisniewski & Slater (2026), who find no evidence of a significant impact of the evolution of hypsodont teeth on facial proportions in Equidae.
Calderón et al. (2026) present new information on growth and development of teeth of Anchitherium, based on the study of their histology.
Evidence from the study of tooth enamel of Miocene Anchitherium, indicative of similar life histories of specimens from Germany and Spain ranging from the MN5 to the MN7/8 interval, is presented by Calderón et al. (2026).
Sanz-Pérez et al. (2026) report evidence from the study of isotopic composition of tooth enamel of Hipparion from Miocene (Vallesian) localities in Duero and Madrid basins (Spain) indicative of intensification of seasonality in central Iberian Peninsula by MN 10 interval, as well as indicative of consumption of C3 vegetation by the studied equids and their ecological flexibility.
Dağ et al. (2026) study the composition of the hipparion assemblage from the Miocene strata from the Yamula Reservoir localities (Turkey), and interpret the studied assemblage as consistent with presence of regionally variable mosaic habitats.
Becker et al. (2026) describe hipparion fossil material from the late Pliocene Jradzor section (Armenia) and transfer "Hipparion" longipes and "H." fissurae to the genus Cremohipparion.
Evidence indicating that occlusal enamel patterns in cheek teeth of Pleistocene equids from Alaska and Yukon cannot be used to reliably differentiate among tooth morphotypes is presented by Landry et al. (2026).
Song et al. (2026) determine the affinities of Equus dalianensis on the basis of data from mitochondrial and two nuclear genomes, recovering the studied equid as a member of a lineage within the group of northeast Eurasian wild horse populations, and reporting evidence of contact with eastern Beringian (i.e. American) horses.
Other laurasiatheriansMiscellaneous laurasiatherian research
A study on the preservation of different kinds of steroids in bones of Ashoroa laticosta, Behemotops katsuiei and an unidentified whale from the Oligocene Morawan Formation (Japan) is published by Umamaheswaran et al. (2026).
Matsui, Mitoh & Tsubamoto (2026) identify a purported humerus of a member of the genus Behemotops from the Miocene Chikubetsu Formation (Japan) as actually belonging to a juvenile member of the genus Desmostylus, and interpret the specimen as indicating that members of the genus Desmostylus expanded their range across Hokkaido during the Middle Miocene Climatic Optimum.
Kramarz & Bond (2026) revise the composition of astrapothere assemblages from the Las Flores Formation (Argentina).
Evidence of gradual increase of body mass of macraucheniids throughout their evolutionary history, likely linked to climate changes, is presented by Lobo, Gelfo & de Azevedo (2026).
Redescription of the anatomy of Puelia plicata is published by Vera, Folino & Scarano (2026).
A study on the phylogenetic relationships of toxodontid notoungulates is published by Armella & Deforel (2026).
Armella et al. (2026) make the name of the toxodontid Andinotoxodon bolivarensis, originally described in a doctoral dissertation, available under the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature.
Evidence from the study of tooth wear of Tremacyllus and Paedotherium, interpreted as indicating that pachyrukhine hegetotheriid notoungulates were mainly fruit-seed consumers rather than grazers, is presented by Armella & Croft (2026).
A study on the evolution of the morphological similarity to molar teeth in premolar teeth of ungulates, based on data from extant and extinct artiodactyls and perissodactyls, is published by Ashbaugh, Jamniczky & Theodor (2026).
A study on tooth wear of early Pleistocene ungulates from the Quibas site (Murcia, Spain), interpreted as indicative of a broad spectrum of feeding behaviours consistent with presence of mosaic environments including grasslands with wooded patches, is published by Ramírez-Pedraza, Agustí & Piñero (2026).
Hussain et al. (2026) reconstruct the dietary presences of Pleistocene ungulates from the Pinjor Formation (Pakistan) on the basis of the study of their tooth wear, interpreted as indicating that the studied assemblage was dominated by grazers but also included browsers and mixed-feeders.
A study on the composition of the Late Pleistocene carnivoran and ungulate assemblage from the Fusong Xianren Cave (Jilin, China), including common representatives of the Mammuthus-Coelodonta fauna from northeastern China, is published by Liu et al. (2026).
Rose et al. (2026) provide new information on the forelimb anatomy of Eurotamandua joresi, interpreted as supporting its affinities with Palaeanodonta.
Evidence from micro-computed tomography of the skeleton of Eurotamandua joresi supporting its affinities with palaeanodonts is presented by Rose et al. (2026).
Cabasés Bru et al. (2026) study the anatomy of virtual brain endocasts of Metacheiromys marshi, and report evidence that petrosal lobules (controlling eye movements during locomotion) and olfactory bulbs of the studied mammal were larger than in extant pangolins, as well as evidence of presence of well developed orbital gyrus which might be related to the use of a protrusile tongue in mammals specialized in myrmecophagy.
Chatar et al. (2026) report evidence from the study of tribosphenic carnassial teeth of hyaenodonts and extant and extinct members of Carnivoramorpha indicative of a trade-off during the evolution of vast majority of the studied mammals resulting in prioritization of either shearing or crushing function of the studied teeth, with only minority of predatory mammals evolving optimized dual function of carnassial teeth.
Fischer et al. (2026) study the body mass evolution in European mesonychians, hyaenodonts, oxyaenodonts and carnivoramorphs during the Paleogene, reporting evidence of increase of range of body mass of members of Carnivoramorpha after the Middle Eocene Climatic Optimum (and before the establishment of carnivoran-dominated faunas related to the Grande Coupure), and interpret the replacement of hyaenodont-dominated faunas in Europe by carnivoran-dominated ones as more likely related to climate changes than caused by competition between the different group of mammalian carnivores.
XenarthransCingulatansCingulatan research
Casali et al. (2026) study the phylogenetic affinities of armadillos and their extinct relatives.
Redescription of the holotype of Asterostemma barrealense (reinterpreted as an indeterminate member of Propalaehoplophorini) and description of a new glyptodont specimen from the Chinches Formation (San Juan Province, Argentina) assigned to the group Propalaehoplophorini is published by Martini et al. (2026).
Lagunas-Rodríguez et al. (2026) describe fossil material of Glyptotherium cylindricum from the Pleistocene strata from Puebla (Mexico), and interpret the presence of fossils of G. cylindricum in the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt and in the Sierra Madre del Sur within the State of Puebla as likely linked to the location of the corridor used by members of the species to disperse into North America.
Zamorano, Vezzosi & Mones (2026) describe a caudal tube of Panochthus sp. from the Pleistocene strata (possibly Timbúes Formation) in the Santa Fe Province (Argentina) and reevaluate the validity of Panochthus florensis, considering it to be species inquirenda.
Taxonomic revision of late Pliocene to Middle Pleistocene glyptodonts from central Argentina is published by Zurita et al. (2026).
Sostillo et al. (2026) provide a systematic review of glyptodonts from the Quaternary strata from eastern and central La Pampa Province (Argentina).
García, Blanco & Rinderknecht (2026) provide estimates of body mass of Neoglyptatelus uruguayensis.
The first specimen of Eutatus seguini preserved with the entirety of the caudal armor is described from the Pleistocene strata from the Laguna Melincué area (Santa Fe Province, Argentina) by Barasoain et al. (2026).
Barasoain et al. (2026) describe fossil material of the big hairy armadillo from the Pleistocene strata of the La Paz Formation (Bolivia), representing the northernmost record of the species reported to date and the first known fossil evidence of presence of the species in high-altitude environments.
PilosansPilosan research
Casali et al. (2026) identify a poorly developed dental alveolus in a specimen of Nothrotherium maquinense from the Pleistocene strata from Brazil, occupying the position of caniniform alveolus in Neogene nothrotheriids, and interpreted as a possible case of partial re-expression of a lost ancestral dental condition in the studied individual.
Revision of nematheriine scelidotheriid sloths from the Miocene Santa Cruz Formation (Argentina) is published by Boscaini et al. (2026), who assign all studied fossils to the genus Nematherium, with the majority of them assigned to the species N. angulatum
New fossil material of Ocnotherium giganteum, including a nearly complete skull and two partial skeletons, is described from the Pleistocene strata from Brazil by Pujos et al. (2026), who recover O. giganteum as a mylodontine mylodontid.
Evidence from the study of a mylodontid coprolite from the Pleistocene strata from the Cueva Cacao 1.A site (Argentina) indicative of a grazing-browsing dietary niche of the producer is presented by Velázquez et al. (2026).
Zicos et al. (2026) compare the utility of three ancient DNA extraction methods for recovery of DNA from coprolites of Mylodon darwinii and soil samples from Cueva del Milodón (Chile), and report recovery of both sloth mitochondrial genomes and signatures of local flora.
Harper et al. (2026) compare the morphology of the femoral neck in members of the genera Acratocnus, Megalocnus, Neocnus and Parocnus with those of extant xenarthrans, and reconstruct the locomotor behaviors of the studied extinct sloths, supporting the interpretation of Parocnus as primarily terrestrial.
Feola et al. (2026) revise the fossil record of ground sloth footprints, and name new ichnotaxa Megatherichnidae, Falciformichnus and Megatherichnum agilis.
General xenarthran researchOther eutheriansMiscellaneous eutherian research
Lopatin & Averianov (2026) report the discovery of a new eutherian petrosal bone from the Lower Cretaceous (Aptian-Albian) strata from the Khovoor locality (Mongolia), and interpret the two eutherian petrosal reported from the Khovoor locality to date as likely belonging to two distinct taxa, possibly Prokennalestes minor and Hovurlestes noyon.
Description of the endocranial anatomy of Leptictis dakotensis and L. haydeni is published by Van Gent et al. (2026).
Raynaud et al. (2026) describe fossil material of Coryphodon from the Eocene strata from the Le Quesnoy site (France), compare the diagnostic characters of C. eocaenus, C. anthracoideus and C. oweni, and interpret the latter two species as junior synonyms of C. eocaenus.
MetatheriansMetatherian research
Imprint of a manus and pes of a small carnivorous mammal, interpreted as most likely to be a member of Sparassodonta, is described from the Eocene strata of the Fossil Hill Formation (King George Island, Antarctica) by Mansilla-Vera et al. (2026).
Redescription of the skull anatomy of Argyrolagus is published by Forasiepi et al. (2026).
Carneiro et al. (2026) reinterpret purported paucituberculatan Riolestes capricornicus as a junior synonym of the protodidelphid opossum species Robertbutleria mastodontoidea.
Rich, Flannery & Vickers-Rich (2026) argue that Cretaceous tribosphenic mammals similar to Ausktribosphenos and Bishops might be ancestral to australidelphians, and that australidelphians and ameridelphians might have separate origins.
Gaschk et al. (2026) report evidence of similarities of locomotor biomechanics of extant carnivorous mammals with similar hunting ecology, and find locomotor strategies of the thylacine to be similar to those of extant opportunistic pouncing carnivores.
Weisbecker et al. (2026) study the cranial morphology and function in the thylacine, and find that the combination of functional traits of skull of members of this species has no analogue among living mammalian carnivores.
Watts et al. (2026) study the hindlimb morphology of Hadronomas puckridgi, and interpret its foot with a robust fifth digit as representing an intermediate stage in sthenurine evolution, preceding the appearance of astragalar specializations and loss of the fifth digit in later sthenurines.
Evidence from the study of extant and extinct kangaroos, indicating that giant extinct kangaroos were mechanically capable of hopping but it may not have been their primary locomotor mode, is presented by Jones, Jones & Nudds (2026).
Couzens, King & Prideaux (2026) report evidence from the study of the fossil record of kangaroos indicative of a progressive increase in tooth enamel thickness in grass-feeding taxa that coincided with expansion of arid habitats in Australia since the late Miocene.
Koungoulos, Kerr & O'Connor (2026) describe a manual phalanx bone of a member of the genus Protemnodon from the Taora rockshelter (Papua New Guinea), providing evidence of local survival of members of this genus into the middle Holocene.
MonotremesMonotreme research
Flannery et al. (2026) review the fossil record and evolutionary history of monotremes.
Chimento (2026) reports evidence of similarities of morphology of teeth and mandibles of monotremes, meridiolestidans and dryolestoids from Northern Hemisphere, and interprets the available data as consistent with origin of monotreme dental pattern from teeth of Gondwanan dryolestoids.
Ziegler & Lockett (2026) report the discovery of a skull of Megalibgwilia owenii from the Foul Air Cave in the Buchan Caves Reserve, representing the first record of the species from Victoria (Australia).
Other mammalsOther mammalian research
The largest mammal-like tracks from the Lower Cretaceous strata from Gondwana reported to date are described from the Botucatu Formation (Brazil) by Buck et al. (2026), expanding known size range of Early Cretaceous mammaliaforms.
Redescription and a study on the affinities of Buginbaatar transaltaiensis is published by Lopatin & Averianov (2026).
Lopatin & Averianov (2026) report the first discovery of fossil material of multituberculates belonging to the group Djadochtatherioidea from the Upper Cretaceous Nemegt Formation (Mongolia).
New information on the endocranial anatomy of Kryptobaatar dashzevegi is provided by Macrini & Rowe (2026).
Krause et al. (2026) identify fossil material of "Kimbetopsalis" simmonsae from the Paleocene strata of the Denver Formation (Colorado, United States), extending known geographical range of this species, and transfer the studied species to the genus Taeniolabis.
Bishop & Pierce (2026) reconstruct the musculature of the forelimbs five non-therian synapsids, including Vincelestes neuquenianus.
General mammalian research
Migliaro Petroni et al. (2026) describe tracks of a small-bodied, fast-moving mammal from the Upper Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) strata of the Yacoraite Formation (Argentina), assigned to the ichnotaxon Brasilichnium cf. saltatorium and extending known stratigraphic distribution of the ichnogenus Brasilichnium.
A new, diverse assemblage of teeth of Paleocene (Torrejonian) mammals is reported from the Tullock Member of the Fort Union Formation (Montana, United States) by Hovatter & Wilson Mantilla (2026).
Evidence indicating that carbon isotope excursions and probable warming events during the Danian were associated with strong pulses of turnover of mammalian assemblages is reported from the study of the fossil record from the San Juan Basin (New Mexico, United States) and other basins in the Rocky Mountain Region is presented by Secord et al. (2026).
Evidence from the study of teeth of Paleocene placentals from the Nanxiong, Qianshan and Chijiang basins (China), indicating that the studied mammals achieved high dental topographic variability during the first 10 million years of the Cenozoic and that the variability of their dental traits paralleled global and regional environmental changes, is presented by Tseng, Li & Ting (2026), who argue that living placental lineages might originate from phenotypically variable and functionally flexible ancestors such as the mammals from the studied assemblages from paleotropical Asia.
He et al. (2026) date the mammalian assemblage from the Relu Basin in the Tibetan Plateau (China) to 39.2–38.1 million years ago, and find that the presence of this assemblage in the studied area coincided with a seasonal rainfall regime, climatic conditions with similarities to Mediterranean-type climate, and expansion of high-elevation subtropical forests.
Revision of the composition of the assemblages of Neogene terrestrial mammals from the Chesapeake Group (Maryland and Virginia, United States) is published by Eshelman et al. (2026), who interpret the studied faunas as indicative of presence of a combination of forest and grassland habitats, with a gradual shift towards more forested environments.
Arias-Concha et al. (2026) reconstruct the diet of Miocene rodents and South American native ungulates from the La Venta site (Colombia) on the basis of stable isotope analyses of tooth enamel, reporting evidence of C3-dominated diets of the studied mammals, but also evidence of ecological differentiation.
Casanovas-Vilar et al. (2026) interpret the small mammal assemblage from the Vallès-Penedès Basin (Spain) as consistent with a climate during the Miocene that was transitional between humid subtropical and Mediterranean types, finding no evidence of significant climate changes at the times of major faunal turnovers.
Martín-Perea et al. (2026) study the taphonomy of late Miocene mammalian assemblages from the Daidian and Dongmen sites (China), and interpret the studied assemblages as resulting from gradual accumulation through attritional mortality.
Evidence from fossil data from low latitudes in Mexico, indicating that the dispersal of North American mammals into South America during the Great American Interchange was preceded and primed by their accumulation in Mexico beginning 10 million years ago, is presented by Tseng et al. (2026).
Sun, de la Torre & Bibi (2026) study the composition of large mammal faunas in Africa and Eurasia throughout the last 10 million years, finding no evidence of waves of faunal dispersal out of Africa, no evidence that early hominins followed dispersal routes of large herbivores out of Africa, no evidence that dispersal of early hominins into Eurasia coincided with major changes in the functional structure of mammalian communities, and no evidence of signification latitudinal differences of the studied communities.
Cantalapiedra et al. (2026) study the diversification trends of African artiodactyls, perissodactyls and proboscideans during the last 23 million years, and interpret the decline of large African herbivores as more likely caused by low speciation rates and by environmental constraints on speciation linked to prolonged aridification of Africa than by elevated extinction rates.
Evidence from the study of dental and body mass traits of large herbivores from the Turkana Basin and Tugen Hills, indicating that, unlike individual functional traits of mammals from the studied assemblages, multivariate combinations of traits remained closely aligned with environmental conditions throughout the last 10 million years, is presented by Glöggler et al. (2026); the data and the analytical framework of this study are subsequently reevaluated by Greiner & Dagher (2026), who do not consider the conclusions of the study of Glöggler et al. to be conclusively supported by available data.
Evidence linking late Miocene global cooling and northern Tibetan Plateau uplift to near-synchronous monsoon intensification and turnover of mammalian communities in Asia approximately 8.7 million years ago is presented by Han et al. (2026).
Choudhary et al. (2026) describe new mammalian fossil material from the Tapar locality (Gujarat, India), interpreted as corroborating late Miocene age of mammals from the studied locality and providing evidence of their biogeographical links with mammals from the lower Nagri Formation.
Fossils of a diverse mammalian assemblage, interpreted as living in a wooded savanna environment shortly before the Messinian salinity crisis, are described from the Ouedhref Formation (Tunisia) by Ksila et al. (2026).
A study on the mammalian assemblages from the Miocene Sahabi Formation and Pliocene Qarat Weddah Formation at the As-Sahabi site (Libya), providing evidence of changes of composition of the studied assemblages likely linked to environmental changes resulting from the Messinian salinity crisis, is published by Al Riaydh, Fara & Smith (2026).
Evidence from geochemical analyses of teeth of Blancan proboscideans and horses from the Rancho Jorge locality (Sonora, Mexico), indicating that the studied mammals lived in arid environment and had mixed diets based on C3 and C4 plants, is presented by Hernández-Sandoval et al. (2026).
Shidqi et al. (2026) review the fossil record of Pleistocene mammals from Sumatra (Indonesia), reporting evidence of presence of mammals with Indochinese and Sundaic affinities and evidence of limited taxonomic losses since the late Middle Pleistocene.
Zhang et al. (2026) report the discovery of new fossil material of Early Pleistocene mammals from the Yeka locality in the Shangri-La region (Yunnan, China), and interpret the composition of the studied assemblage as indicative of an environment including a forest mixed with a grassland landscape.
Evidence from the study of carbon and oxygen isotope composition of tooth enamel of equids, bovids and hippopotamids from Melka Wakena and Gadeb, interpreted as indicative of presence of montane grasslands with shrubs and aquatic habitats in Ethiopian highlands that provided recurrent access to water and vegetation to mammals (including Acheulean-making hominins) in the late Early Pleistocene, is presented by Briatico et al. (2026).
Evidence from the study of the composition of Middle and Late Pleistocene small mammalian assemblages from the East European Plain, interpreted as consistent with presence of semi-arid and arid steppe habitats during the warmest and driest phases of the Pleistocene interglacials, is presented Markova, Puzachenko & Tsatskin (2026).
Robu et al. (2026) reconstruct trophic relationships of Late Pleistocene mammals from cave sites in the Romanian Carpathians with and without bears on the basis of an isotopic analysis of their bones, reporting evidence of overall similar dietary behavior of the studied mammals throughout Europe during Marine Isotope Stage 3, as well as evidence of mainly herbivorous diet of cave bears that included varying levels of animal protein consumption, and interpret the dietary behavior of the studied cave bears as possibly influenced by abundance of the carnivores.
Zeigen et al. (2026) study the isotopic composition of carbonate from the tooth enamel of the Persian fallow deers from sediments of the Amud Cave (Israel) associated with Neanderthal activity, interpreted as suggestive of exploitation of different habitats by fallow deer and gazelles from the site, and suggesting that fallow deer and gazelles were targeted by Neanderthals from the Amud Cave through different procurement strategies.
Orbach et al. (2026) study the mammalian remains from a Pleistocene hyena den from the Geula Cave (Israel), reporting evidence of exploitation of similar ungulate communities by hyenas and humans during the mid-Middle Paleolithic, likely made possible by high ungulate diversity at the time, reducing competitive pressure between hyenas and humans.
Hartman et al. (2026) reconstruct the environment of Pleistocene gazelles and Persian fallow deer from the Mughr el-Hamamah site (Jordan) on the basis of isotopic analysis of their teeth, interpret their findings as indicative of conditions that were favorable for human occupations during a humid phase of the Last Glacial cycle, and estimate that the hunting area of Early Upper Paleolithic humans from the site covered ∼36 square kilometers.
García-Morato et al. (2026) review the fossil record of small-bodied mammals from Middle to Later Stone Age sites in South Africa, and report evidence of impact of site-specific ecological factors on the composition of the studied assemblages.
Sawada et al. (2026) interpret burned bone fragments from the terminal Paleolithic strafa from the Fukui Cave (Japan) as more likely to be evidence of human exploitation of medium-sized artiodactyls than evidene of exploitation of large mammals that became extinct in the Pleistocene.
Evidence indicating that deposition of sediments preserving bones of mammals (mostly mammoths) at The Mammoth Site (South Dakota, United States) happened during Marine Isotope Stages 6 and 7 is presented by Mahan et al. (2026).
Pym et al. (2026) reconstruct changes of late Pleistocene megafaunal populations from the Isthmus of Panama on the basis of the study of spores of coprophilous fungi from sediments of the La Yeguada lake, providing evidence of three distinct phases of decline and recovery coinciding with shifts in vegetation composition.
Asevedo et al. (2026) determine the diet and habitats of Pleistocene Notiomastodon platensis, Toxodon platensis and cf. Eremotherium from the Teles Pires basin in Brazilian Amazon on the basis of tooth wear and carbon and oxygen stable isotope data from their remains, interpreting T. platensis and cf. Eremotherium as browsers from woodland habitats, and interpreting different individuals of N. platensis as browsers from woodlands and mixed feeders from savanna-like landscapes.
Brito, Leal & Dantas (2026) report the discovery of a new assemblage of Pleistocene mammals from fossiliferous tank deposits in the municipalities of Mirante and Anagé (Bahia, Brazil), and interpret carbon and oxygen isotopic composition of the studied bones as consistent with overall generalist herbivorous diets of the studied mammals.
Oliveira et al. (2026) study the composition of the Late Pleistocene mammalian assemblage from the Toca Fria cave (Brazil), and interpret the studied assemblage as including mammals from two habitas: a low-density forest and an open savanna.
Carrasco et al. (2026) report evidence of losses of functional diversity of terrestrial mammalian assemblages from Brazilian Pampa resulting from late Quaternary extinctions, and find that only some of the introduced mammals might be ecological substitutes for extinct megafauna.
Neves et al. (2026) study the composition of the Quaternary small mammal assemblage from the Araras Ravine at the Lajedo de Soledade site (Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil), providing evidence of similarities with extant faunas from open environments in the Caatinga and Cerrado.
A study on the late Pleistocene/early Holocene fauna from the Pikimachay Cave (Peru) is published by Yataco et al. (2026), who interpret the studied site as likely to be a giant ground sloth burrow that was also used by carnivores and/or humans.
Hullot et al. (2026) propose a standardized methodological framework for the study of enamel histology in fossil taxa, and apply it to the study of enamel histology and growth of molars of toxodont notoungulates Pleurostylodon modicus, Eurygenium pacegnum, Adinotherium ovinum and Nesodon imbricatus.
Von Koenigswald (2026) reviews the morphological diversity of incisors and canines in extant and fossil mammals.
Wilson et al. (2026) compare the wear of bilophodont teeth in xenungulates, pyrotheres, fossil and modern tapirs and in extant marsupials, and interpret their findings as suggestive of browsing feeding behaviors of xenungulates and fossil tapirs, as well as of variable diets of different members of Pyrotheria.
Evidence of preservation of amino acids in tooth enamel of fossil proboscideans, equids and rhinocerotids dating back as far as 48 million years is presented by Gatti et al. (2026).
Herrando-Pérez et al. (2026) present a dataset of ages obtained through radiocarbon dating by accelerator mass spectrometry of bone collagen from remains of late Quaternary mammalian megafauna from Eurasia and North America.
Köhler (2026) reviews the evolution of traits of organims from inland environments (including extinct Myotragus) that are adaptations to life in low-mortality isolated ecosystems with limited resources, and notes similarities with the evolution of traits of organisms adapted to life in caves.
Schowanek et al. (2026) study factors influencing survival probability of mammals living in tropical forests of Africa, the Americas and the Indomalayan realm during the past 130,000 years, and report that analyses utilizing different statistical models recover similar predictors of extinction risk at the global scale, but recover variable predictors of extinction risk at smaller spatial scales.
Kennedy & Sumanarathna (2026) present the first three-dimensional palaeoart reconstructions of Palaeoloxodon namadicus sinhaleyus and the Quaternary rhinoceros from the Sabaragamuwa Basin (Sri Lanka) historically referred to as Rhinoceros sinhaleyus.
Faria et al. (2026) determine the ecology of Holocene Eremotherium laurillardi, Notiomastodon platensis, Toxodon platensis, Smilodon populator, Palaeolama major and Xenorhinotherium bahiense from the Jirau and Rio Miranda sites (Brazil) on the basis of the study of the isotopic composition of their teeth, and interpret the Brazilian Intertropical Region as one of the last environmental refuges for the studied mammals.
Toledo et al. (2026) compare the complexity of the organization of the manus and pes of extant mammals and extinct xenarthrans and litopterns, reporting evidence of convergences in the organization of limb extremities of litopterns and extant ungulates, and of atypical patterns in xenarthrans.
Sotelo et al. (2026) simulate possible future fossil record of extant land mammals, and interpret their findings as indicating that conclusions on the evolution of body mass and diet drawn from the study of the fossil record of mammals might be significantly affected by biases such as incompleteness of the fossil record.


Eusociality (Greek εὖ eu 'good' or 'true' and social) is the highest level of organization of sociality. It is defined by the following characteristics: cooperative brood care (including care of offspring from other individuals), overlapping generations within a colony of adults, and a division of labor into reproductive and non-reproductive groups. The division of labor creates specialized behavioral groups within an animal society, sometimes called castes. Eusociality is distinguished from all other social systems because individuals of at least one caste usually lose the ability to perform behaviors characteristic of individuals in another caste. (Narrow definitions, such as that of Crespi & Yagena, require that an irreversibly sterile caste be present, but this is not universally agreed on.) Eusocial colonies can be viewed as superorganisms.
Eusociality has evolved among the insects, crustaceans, trematodes and mammals. It is most widespread in the Hymenoptera (ants, bees, and wasps) and in termites. A colony has caste differences: queens and reproductive males take the roles of the sole reproducers, while soldiers and workers work together to create and maintain a living situation favorable for the brood. Queens produce multiple queen pheromones to create and maintain the eusocial state in their colonies; they may also eat eggs laid by other females or exert dominance by fighting. There are two eusocial rodents: the naked mole-rat and the Damaraland mole-rat. Some shrimps, such as Synalpheus regalis, are eusocial. E. O. Wilson and others have claimed that humans have evolved a weak form of eusociality. It has been suggested that the colonial and epiphytic staghorn fern, too, may make use of a primitively eusocial division of labor.
History
The term "eusocial" was introduced in 1966 by Suzanne Batra, who used it to describe nesting behavior in Halictid bees, on a scale of subsocial/solitary, colonial/communal, semisocial, and eusocial, where a colony is started by a single individual. Batra observed the cooperative behavior of the bees, males and females alike, as they took responsibility for at least one duty (e.g., burrowing, cell construction, oviposition) within the colony. The cooperativeness was essential as the activity of one labor division greatly influenced the activity of another. Eusocial colonies can be viewed as superorganisms, with individual castes being analogous to different tissue or cell types in a multicellular organism; castes fulfill a specific role that contributes to the functioning and survival of the whole colony, while being incapable of independent survival outside the colony.
In 1969, Charles D. Michener further expanded Batra's classification with his comparative study of social behavior in bees. He observed multiple species of bees (Apoidea) in order to investigate the different levels of animal sociality, many of which are different stages that a colony may pass through. Eusociality, which is the highest level of animal sociality a species can attain, specifically had three characteristics that distinguished it from the other levels:

Egg-layers and worker-like individuals among adult females (reproductive division of labor, with or without sterile castes)
The overlap of generations (mother and adult offspring)
Cooperative care of the brood

E. O. Wilson in 1971 extended the concept to include other social insects, such as ants, wasps, and termites. Originally, it was defined to include organisms (only invertebrates) that fulfilled the same three criteria defined by Michener.
Eusociality was then discovered in a group of chordates, the mole-rats.
Some researchers such as Crespi and Yanega have argued that another possibly important criterion for eusociality is "the point of no return". This is characterized by having individuals fixed into one behavioral group, usually before reproductive maturity. This prevents them from transitioning between behavioral groups, and creates a society with individuals truly dependent on each other for survival and reproductive success. For many insects, this irreversibility has changed the anatomy of the worker caste, which is sterile and provides support for the reproductive caste. This definition would exclude most cases of claimed eusociality in mammals.
Other researchers have suggested that cooperative breeding and eusociality are not discrete phenomena, but rather form a continuum of fundamentally similar social systems whose main differences lie in the distribution of lifetime reproductive success among group members. Vertebrate and invertebrate cooperative breeders can be arrayed along a common axis, that represents a standardized measure of reproductive variance.  In this view, loaded terms like "primitive" and "advanced" eusociality should be dropped. An advantage of this approach is that it unites all occurrences of alloparental helping of kin under a single theoretical umbrella (e.g., Hamilton's rule).
Diversity
Most eusocial societies exist in arthropods, while a few are found in mammals. Some ferns may exhibit a form of eusocial behavior.
In insects
Eusociality has evolved multiple times in different insect orders, including hymenopterans, termites, thrips, aphids, wasps, and beetles.
In hymenopterans
The order Hymenoptera contains the largest group of eusocial insects, including ants, bees, and wasps—divided into castes: reproductive queens, drones, more or less sterile workers, and sometimes also soldiers that perform specialized tasks. In the well-studied social wasp Polistes versicolor, dominant females perform tasks such as building new cells and ovipositing, while subordinate females tend to perform tasks like feeding the larvae and foraging. The task differentiation between castes can be seen in the fact that subordinates complete 81.4% of the total foraging activity, while dominants only complete 18.6% of the total foraging. Eusocial species with a sterile caste are sometimes called hypersocial.
While only a moderate percentage of species in bees (families Apidae and Halictidae) and wasps (Crabronidae and Vespidae) are eusocial, all species of ants (Formicidae) are eusocial. Some major lineages of wasps are mostly or entirely eusocial, including the subfamilies Polistinae and Vespinae. The corbiculate bees (subfamily Apinae of family Apidae) contain four tribes of varying degrees of sociality: the highly eusocial Apini (honey bees) and Meliponini (stingless bees), primitively eusocial Bombini (bumble bees), and the mostly solitary or weakly social Euglossini (orchid bees). Eusociality in these families is sometimes managed by a set of pheromones that alter the behavior of specific castes in the colony. These pheromones may act across different species, as observed in Apis andreniformis (black dwarf honey bee), where worker bees responded to queen pheromone from the related Apis florea (red dwarf honey bee). Pheromones are sometimes used in these castes to assist with foraging. Workers of the Australian stingless bee Tetragonula carbonaria, for instance, mark food sources with a pheromone, helping their nest mates to find the food.
Beside corbiculate bees, eusociality is documented within Apidae in xylocopine bees, where only simple colonies containing one or two "worker" females have been documented in the tribes Xylocopini and Ceratinini, though some members of Allodapini have larger eusocial colonies. Similarly, in the Colletidae, there is only one species reported to exhibit any form of social behavior; occasional nests of the species Amphylaeus morosus contain a female and a "guard" (a sister or daughter of the female that founded the nest), creating very small social colonies, where both females are capable of reproduction though only the foundress female appears to lay eggs. In Halictidae (sweat bees), by contrast, eusociality is well-documented in hundreds of species, primarily in the genera Halictus and Lasioglossum. In Lasioglossum aeneiventre, a halictid bee from Central America, nests may be headed by more than one female; such nests have more cells, and the number of active cells per female is correlated with the number of females in the nest, implying that having more females leads to more efficient building and provisioning of cells. In several species with only one queen, such as Lasioglossum malachurum in Europe, or Halictus rubicundus in North America, the degree of eusociality depends on the climatic zone in which the species is found - they are solitary in colder climates and social in warmer climates.

Reproductive specialization in Hymenoptera generally involves the production of sterile members of the species, which carry out specialized tasks to care for the reproductive members. Individuals may have behavior and morphology modified for group defense, including self-sacrificing behavior. For example, members of the sterile caste of the honeypot ants such as Myrmecocystus fill their abdomens with liquid food until they become immobile and hang from the ceilings of the underground nests, acting as food storage for the rest of the colony. Not all social hymenopterans have distinct morphological differences between castes. For example, in the Neotropical social wasp Synoeca surinama, caste ranks are determined by social displays in the developing brood. Castes are sometimes further specialized in their behavior based on age, as in Scaptotrigona postica workers. Between approximately 0–40 days old, the workers perform tasks within the nest such as provisioning cell broods, colony cleaning, and nectar reception and dehydration. Once older than 40 days, S. postica workers move outside the nest for colony defense and foraging.
In termites
Termites (order Blattodea, infraorder Isoptera) make up another large portion of highly advanced eusocial animals. The colony is differentiated into various castes: the queen and king are the sole reproducing individuals; workers forage and maintain food and resources; and soldiers defend the colony against ant attacks. The latter two castes, which are sterile and perform highly specialized, complex social behaviors, are derived from different stages of pluripotent larvae produced by the reproductive caste. Some soldiers have jaws so enlarged (specialized for defense and attack) that they are unable to feed themselves and must be fed by workers.
In beetles
Austroplatypus incompertus is a species of ambrosia beetle native to Australia, and is the first beetle (order Coleoptera) to be recognized as eusocial. This species forms colonies in which a single female is fertilized, and is protected by many unfertilized females, which serve as workers excavating tunnels in trees. This species has cooperative brood care, in which individuals care for juveniles that are not their own.
In gall-inducing insects
Some gall-inducing insects, including the gall-forming aphid, Pemphigus spyrothecae (order Hemiptera), and thrips such as Kladothrips (order Thysanoptera), are described as eusocial. These species have very high relatedness among individuals due to their asexual reproduction (sterile soldier castes being clones produced by parthenogenesis), but the gall-inhabiting behavior gives these species a defensible resource. They produce soldier castes for fortress defense and protection of the colony against predators, kleptoparasites, and competitors. In these groups, eusociality is produced by both high relatedness and by living in a restricted, shared area.
In crustaceans
Eusociality has evolved in three different lineages in the colonial crustacean genus Synalphaeus. S. regalis, S. microneptunus, S. filidigitus, S. elizabethae, S. chacei, S. riosi, S. duffyi, and S. cayoneptunus are the eight recorded species of parasitic shrimp that rely on fortress defense and live in groups of closely related individuals in tropical reefs and sponges. They live eusocially with a single breeding female, and a large number of male defenders armed with enlarged snapping claws. There is a single shared living space for the colony members, and the non-breeding members act to defend it.
The fortress defense hypothesis additionally points out that because sponges provide both food and shelter, there is an aggregation of relatives (because the shrimp do not have to disperse to find food), and much competition for those nesting sites. Being the target of attack promotes a good defense system (soldier caste); soldiers promote the fitness of the whole nest by ensuring safety and reproduction of the queen.
Eusociality offers a competitive advantage in shrimp populations. Eusocial species are more abundant, occupy more of the habitat, and use more of the available resources than non-eusocial species.
In trematodes
The trematodes are a class of parasitic flatworm, also known as flukes. One species, Haplorchis pumilio, has evolved eusociality involving a colony creating a class of sterile soldiers. One fluke invades a host and establishes a colony of dozens to thousands of clones that work together to take it over. Since rival trematode species can invade and replace the colony, it is protected by a specialized caste of sterile soldier trematodes. Soldiers are smaller, more mobile, and develop along a different pathway than sexually mature reproductives. One difference is that a soldier's mouthparts (pharynx) is five times as big as those of the reproductives. They make up nearly a quarter of the volume of the soldier. These soldiers do not have a germinal mass, never metamorphose to be reproductive, and are, therefore, obligately sterile. Soldiers are readily distinguished from the immature and mature reproductive worms. Soldiers are more aggressive than reproductives, attacking heterospecific trematodes that infect their host in vitro. H. pumilio soldiers do not attack conspecifics from other colonies. The soldiers are not evenly distributed throughout the host body. They are found in the highest numbers in the basal visceral mass, where competing trematodes tend to multiply during the early phase of infection. This strategic positioning allows them to effectively defend against invaders, similar to how soldier distribution patterns are seen in other animals with defensive castes. They "appear to be an obligately sterile physical caste, akin to that of the most advanced social insects".
In nonhuman mammals
Among mammals, two species in the rodent group Phiomorpha are eusocial, the naked mole-rat (Heterocephalus glaber) and the Damaraland mole-rat (Fukomys damarensis), both of which are highly inbred. These mole-rats live in harsh, limiting environments, where dispersal is difficult and dangerous and cooperation is required to find food and defend against predators. Most colony members are workers, and they cooperatively care for offspring of a single reproductive female (the queen) to whom they are closely related. These mole-rats are eusocial under any definition of the term. Interestingly, the discovery of male and female dispersers has revealed that there is a mechanism of inter-colony outbreeding in naked mole-rats. Outbreeding reduces intra-colony genetic relatedness, but reduces inbreeding depression.  Dispersers are morphologically, physiologically and behaviorally distinct from colony members and actively seek to leave their burrow when an escape opportunity presents itself. These individuals are equipped with generous fat reserves for their journey. Though they possess high levels of luteinizing hormone, dispersers are only interested in mating with individuals from foreign colonies rather than their own colony's queen. They also show little interest in working cooperatively with workers in their natal colony. Hence, disperser morphs are well-prepared to promote the establishment of new, initially outbred colonies, before cycles of inbreeding resume.
Some mammals in the Carnivora and Primates have eusocial tendencies, especially meerkats (Suricata suricatta) and dwarf mongooses (Helogale parvula). These show cooperative breeding and marked reproductive skews. In the dwarf mongoose, the breeding pair receives food priority and protection from subordinates and rarely has to defend against predators.
In humans
Scientists have debated whether humans are prosocial or eusocial. Edward O. Wilson called humans eusocial apes, arguing for similarities to ants, and observing that early hominins cooperated to rear their children while other members of the same group hunted and foraged. Wilson and others argued that through cooperation and teamwork, ants and humans form superorganisms. Human reproductive labor can be considered as being divided between castes if one treats menopausal women as a sterile caste.
Critics of group selection theory such as Richard Dawkins reject this argument. They reject the view that human reproductive labor can be viewed as being divided between castes.
Though controversial, it has been suggested that homosexuality in men and menopause could have evolved through kin selection. This would mean that humans sometimes exhibit a type of alloparental behavior known as "helpers at the nest", with juveniles and sexually mature adolescents helping their parents raise subsequent broods, as in some birds, some bees without sterile castes, and meerkats. In these species, the helpers reproduce on their own if given the opportunity. Whether these animals are considered eusocial depends on whether "eusociality" definition requires a sterile caste, which as mentioned above is a subject of disagreement.
In plants
One plant, the epiphytic staghorn fern, Platycerium bifurcatum (Polypodiaceae), may exhibit a primitive form of eusocial behavior amongst clones. The evidence for this is that individuals live in colonies, where they are structured in different ways, with fronds of differing size and shape, to collect and store water and nutrients for the colony to use. At the top of a colony, there are both pleated fan-shaped "nest" fronds that collect and hold water, and gutter-shaped "strap" fronds that channel water: no solitary Platycerium species has both types. At the bottom of a colony, there are "nest" fronds that clasp the trunk of the tree supporting the fern, and drooping photosynthetic fronds. These are argued to be adapted to support the colony structurally, i.e. that the individuals in the colony are to some degree specialized for tasks, a division of labor.
EvolutionPhylogenetic distribution
Eusociality is a rare but widespread phenomenon in species in at least seven orders in the animal kingdom, as shown in the phylogenetic tree (non-eusocial groups not shown). All species of termites are eusocial, and it is believed that they were the first eusocial animals to evolve, sometime in the Late Jurassic period (~150 million years ago). The other orders shown contain both eusocial and non-eusocial species, including many lineages where eusociality is inferred to be the ancestral state. Thus the number of independent evolutions of eusociality (clades) is not known. The major eusocial groups are shown in boldface in the phylogenetic tree.
Paradox
Prior to the gene-centered view of evolution, eusociality was seen as paradoxical: if adaptive evolution unfolds by differential reproduction of individual organisms, the evolution of individuals incapable of passing on their genes presents a challenge. In On the Origin of Species, Darwin referred to the existence of sterile castes as the "one special difficulty, which at first appeared to me insuperable, and actually fatal to my theory". Darwin anticipated that a possible resolution to the paradox might lie in the close family relationship, which W.D. Hamilton quantified a century later with his 1964 inclusive fitness theory. After the gene-centered view of evolution was developed in the mid-1970s, non-reproductive individuals were seen as an extended phenotype of the genes, which are the primary beneficiaries of natural selection.
Inclusive fitness and haplodiploidyArgument that haplodiploidy favors eusociality
According to inclusive fitness theory, organisms can gain fitness by increasing the reproductive output of other individuals that share their genes, especially their close relatives. Natural selection favors individuals to help their relatives when the cost of helping is less than the benefit gained by their relative multiplied by the fraction of genes that they share, i.e. when Cost < relatedness * Benefit. W. D. Hamilton suggested in 1964 that eusociality could evolve more easily among haplodiploid species such as Hymenoptera, because of their unusual relatedness structure.
In haplodiploid species, females develop from fertilized eggs and males develop from unfertilized eggs. Because a male is haploid, his daughters share 100% of his genes and 50% of their mother's. Therefore, they share 75% of their genes with each other. This mechanism of sex determination gives rise to what W. D. Hamilton first termed "supersisters", more closely related to their sisters than they would be to their own offspring. Even though workers often do not reproduce, they can pass on more of their genes by helping to raise their sisters than by having their own offspring (each of which would only have 50% of their genes). This unusual situation, where females may have greater fitness when they help rear sisters rather than producing offspring, is often invoked to explain the multiple independent evolutions of eusociality (at least nine separate times) within the Hymenoptera.
Argument that haplodiploidy does not favor eusociality
Against the supposed benefits of haplodiploidy for eusociality, Robert Trivers notes that while females share 75% of genes with their sisters in haplodiploid populations, they only share 25% of their genes with their brothers. Accordingly, the average relatedness of an individual to their sibling is 50%. Therefore, helping behavior is only advantageous if it is biased to helping sisters, which would drive the population to a 1:3 sex ratio of males to females. At this ratio, males, as the rarer sex, increase in reproductive value, reducing the benefit of female-biased investment.
Further, not all eusocial species are haplodiploid: termites, some snapping shrimps, and mole rats are not. Conversely, non-eusocial bees are also haplodiploid, and among eusocial species many queens mate with multiple males, resulting in a hive of half-sisters that share only 25% of their genes. The association between haplodiploidy and eusociality is below statistical significance. Haplodiploidy is thus neither necessary nor sufficient for eusociality to emerge. Relatedness does still play a part, as monogamy (queens mating singly) is the ancestral state for all eusocial species so far investigated. If kin selection is an important force driving the evolution of eusociality, monogamy should be the ancestral state, because it maximizes the relatedness of colony members.
Evolutionary ecology
Increased parasitism and predation rates are the primary ecological drivers of social organization. Group living affords colony members defense against enemies, specifically predators, parasites, and competitors, and allows them to gain advantage from superior foraging methods. The importance of ecology in the evolution of eusociality is supported by evidence such as experimentally induced reproductive division of labor, for example when normally solitary queens are forced together. Conversely, female Damaraland mole-rats undergo hormonal changes that promote dispersal after periods of high rainfall.
Climate too appears to be a selective agent driving social complexity; across bee lineages and Hymenoptera in general, higher forms of sociality are more likely to occur in tropical than temperate environments. Similarly, social transitions within halictid bees, where eusociality has been gained and lost multiple times, are correlated with periods of climatic warming. Social behavior in facultative social bees is often reliably predicted by ecological conditions, and switches in behavioral type have been experimentally induced by translocating offspring of solitary or social populations to warm and cool climates. In H. rubicundus, females produce a single brood in cooler regions and two or more broods in warmer regions, so the former populations are solitary while the latter are social. In another species of sweat bees, L. calceatum, social phenotype has been predicted by altitude and micro-habitat composition, with social nests found in warmer, sunnier sites, and solitary nests found in adjacent, cooler, shaded locations. Facultatively social bee species, however, which comprise the majority of social bee diversity, have their lowest diversity in the tropics, being largely limited to temperate regions.
Multilevel selection
Once pre-adaptations such as group formation, nest building, high cost of dispersal, and morphological variation are present, between-group competition has been suggested as a driver of the transition to advanced eusociality. M. A. Nowak, C. E. Tarnita, and E. O. Wilson proposed in 2010 that since eusociality produces an extremely altruistic society, eusocial groups should out-reproduce their less cooperative competitors, eventually eliminating all non-eusocial groups from a species. Multilevel selection has been heavily criticized for its conflict with the kin selection theory.
Reversal to solitarity
A reversal to solitarity is an evolutionary phenomenon in which descendants of a eusocial group evolve solitary behavior once again. Bees have been model organisms for the study of reversal to solitarity, because of the diversity of their social systems. Each of the four origins of eusociality in bees was followed by at least one reversal to solitarity, giving a total of at least nine reversals. In a few species, solitary and eusocial colonies appear simultaneously in the same population, and different populations of the same species may be fully solitary or eusocial. This suggests that eusociality is costly to maintain, and can only persist when ecological variables favor it. Disadvantages of eusociality include the cost of investing in non-reproductive offspring, and an increased risk of disease.
All reversals to solitarity have occurred among primitively eusocial groups; none have followed the emergence of advanced eusociality. The "point of no return" hypothesis posits that the morphological differentiation of reproductive and non-reproductive castes prevents highly eusocial species such as the honeybee from reverting to the solitary state.
Physiology and developmentPheromones
Pheromones play an important role in the physiological mechanisms of eusociality. Enzymes involved in the production and perception of pheromones were important for the emergence of eusociality within both termites and hymenopterans. The best-studied queen pheromone system in social insects is that of the honey bee Apis mellifera. Queen mandibular glands produce a mixture of five compounds, three aliphatic and two aromatic, which control workers. Mandibular gland extracts inhibit workers from constructing queen cells, which can delay the hormonally based behavioral development of workers and suppress their ovarian development. Both behavioral effects mediated by the nervous system often leading to recognition of queens (releaser) and physiological effects on the reproductive and endocrine system (primer) are attributed to the same pheromones. These pheromones volatilize or are deactivated within thirty minutes, allowing workers to respond rapidly to the loss of their queen.
The levels of two of the aliphatic compounds increase rapidly in virgin queens within the first week after emergence from the pupa, consistent with their roles as sex attractants during the mating flight. Once a queen is mated and begins laying eggs, she starts producing the full blend of compounds. In several ant species, reproductive activity is associated with pheromone production by queens. Mated egg-laying queens are attractive to workers, whereas young winged virgin queens elicit little or no response.

Among ants, the queen pheromone system of the fire ant Solenopsis invicta includes both releaser and primer pheromones. A queen recognition (releaser) pheromone is stored in the poison sac along with three other compounds. These compounds elicit a behavioral response from workers. Several primer effects have also been demonstrated. Pheromones initiate reproductive development in new winged females, called female sexuals. These chemicals inhibit workers from rearing male and female sexuals, suppress egg production in other queens of multiple queen colonies, and cause workers to execute excess queens. These pheromones maintain the eusocial phenotype, with one queen supported by sterile workers and sexually active males (drones). In queenless colonies, the lack of queen pheromones causes winged females to quickly shed their wings, develop ovaries and lay eggs. These virgin replacement queens assume the role of the queen and start to produce queen pheromones. Similarly, queen weaver ants Oecophylla longinoda have exocrine glands that produce pheromones which prevent workers from laying reproductive eggs.
Similar mechanisms exist in the eusocial wasp Vespula vulgaris. For a queen to dominate all the workers, usually numbering more than 3000 in a colony, she signals her dominance with pheromones. The workers regularly lick the queen while feeding her, and the air-borne pheromone from the queen's body alerts those workers of her dominance.
The mode of action of inhibitory pheromones which prevent the development of eggs in workers has been demonstrated in the bumble bee Bombus terrestris. The pheromones suppress activity of the endocrine gland, the corpus allatum, stopping it from secreting juvenile hormone. With low juvenile hormone, eggs do not mature. Similar inhibitory effects of lowering juvenile hormone were seen in halictine bees and polistine wasps, but not in honey bees.
Other mechanisms
A variety of other mechanisms give queens of different species of social insects a measure of reproductive control over their nest mates. In many Polistes wasps, monogamy is established soon after colony formation by physical dominance interactions among foundresses of the colony including biting, chasing, and food soliciting. Such interactions create a dominance hierarchy headed by larger, older individuals with the greatest ovarian development. The rank of subordinates is correlated with the degree of ovarian development. Workers do not oviposit when queens are present, for a variety of reasons: colonies tend to be small enough that queens can effectively dominate workers; queens practice selective oophagy; the flow of nutrients favors queen over workers; and queens rapidly lay eggs in new or vacated cells.
In primitively eusocial bees (where castes are morphologically similar and colonies are small and short-lived), queens frequently nudge their nest mates and then burrow back down into the nest. This draws workers into the lower part of the nest where they may respond to stimuli for cell construction and maintenance. Being nudged by the queen may help to inhibit ovarian development; in addition, the queen eats any eggs laid by workers. Furthermore, temporally discrete production of workers and gynes (actual or potential queens) can cause size dimorphisms between different castes, as size is strongly influenced by the season during which the individual is reared. In many wasps, worker caste is determined by a temporal pattern in which workers precede non-workers of the same generation. In some cases, for example in bumblebees, queen control weakens late in the season, and the ovaries of workers develop. The queen attempts to maintain her dominance by aggressive behavior and by eating worker-laid eggs; her aggression is often directed towards the worker with the greatest ovarian development.
In highly eusocial wasps (where castes are morphologically dissimilar), both the quantity and quality of food are important for caste differentiation. Recent studies in wasps suggest that differential larval nourishment may be the environmental trigger for larval divergence into workers or gynes. All honey bee larvae are initially fed with royal jelly, which is secreted by workers, but normally they are switched over to a diet of pollen and honey as they mature; if their diet is exclusively royal jelly, they grow larger than normal and differentiate into queens. This jelly contains a specific protein, royalactin, which increases body size, promotes ovary development, and shortens the developmental time period. The differential expression in Polistes of larval genes and proteins (also differentially expressed during queen versus caste development in honey bees) indicates that regulatory mechanisms may operate very early in development.
In popular culture
Stephen Baxter's 2003 science fiction novel Coalescent imagines a human eusocial organization founded in ancient Rome, in which most individuals are subject to reproductive repression.
Harold Fromm, reviewing Groping for Groups by E. O. Wilson and others in The Hudson Review, asks whether Wilson's stated "wish" for humans to bring about "a permanent paradise for human beings" would mean "to be group-selected in factories in the style of Huxley's [1932 novel] Brave New World.
The 1973 novel Hellstrom's Hive by Frank Herbert revolves around a secret society made up entirely of a race of bioengineered insect-like humanoids that is modeled after the behavior of social insect species.


The bobcat (Lynx rufus), also known as the wildcat, bay lynx, or red lynx, is one of the four extant species within the medium-sized wild cat genus Lynx. Native to North America, it ranges from southern Canada through most of the contiguous United States to Oaxaca in Mexico. It is listed as Least Concern on the IUCN Red List since 2002, due to its wide distribution and large population. Although it has been hunted extensively both for sport and fur, populations have proven stable, though declining in some areas.
It has distinctive black bars on its forelegs and a black-tipped, stubby (or "bobbed") tail, from which it derives its name. It reaches a total length (including the tail) of up to 125 cm (50 in). It is an adaptable predator inhabiting wooded areas, semidesert, urban edge, forest edge, and swampland environments. It remains in some of its original range, but populations are vulnerable to extirpation by coyotes and domestic animals.
Though the bobcat prefers rabbits and hares, it hunts insects, chickens, geese and other birds, small rodents, and deer. Prey selection depends on location and habitat, season, and abundance. Like most cats, the bobcat is territorial and largely solitary, although with some overlap in home ranges. It uses several methods to mark its territorial boundaries, including claw marks and deposits of urine or feces. The bobcat breeds from winter into spring and has a gestation period of about two months.
Two subspecies are recognized: one east of the Great Plains, and the other west of the Great Plains. It is featured in some stories of the indigenous peoples of North and Central America, and in the folklore of European-descended inhabitants of the Americas.
Taxonomy and evolution
Felis rufa was the scientific name proposed by Johann Christian Daniel von Schreber in 1777. In the 19th and 20th centuries, the following zoological specimens were described:

Lynx floridanus proposed by Constantine Samuel Rafinesque in 1817 was a greyish lynx with yellowish brown spots from Florida.
Lynx fasciatus also proposed by Rafinesque in 1817 was a reddish-brown lynx with thick fur from the northwest coast.
Lynx baileyi proposed by Clinton Hart Merriam in 1890 was a female lynx that was shot in the San Francisco Mountains.
Lynx texensis proposed by Joel Asaph Allen in 1895 to replace the earlier name Lynx rufus var. maculatus.
Lynx gigas proposed by Outram Bangs in 1897 was a skin of an adult male lynx shot near Bear River, Nova Scotia.
Lynx rufus eremicus and Lynx rufus californicus proposed by Edgar Alexander Mearns in 1898 were skins and skulls of two adult lynxes killed in San Diego County, California.
Lynx rufus peninsularis proposed by Oldfield Thomas in 1898 was a skull and a pale rufous skin of a male lynx from Baja California Peninsula.
Lynx fasciatus pallescens proposed by Merriam in 1899, was a skin of a gray lynx that was killed near Trout Lake, Washington.
Lynx ruffus escuinapae proposed by Allen in 1903 was a skull and a pale rufous skin of an adult female from Escuinapa Municipality in Mexico.
Lynx rufus superiorensis by Randolph Lee Peterson and Stuart C. Downing in 1952 was a skeleton and skin of a male lynx killed near Port Arthur, Ontario.
Lynx rufus oaxacensis proposed by George Goodwin in 1963 was based on three skulls and six skins of lynxes killed in the Mexican Tehuantepec District.
The validity of these subspecies was challenged in 1981 because of the minor differences between specimens from the various geographic regions in North America.
Since the revision of cat taxonomy in 2017, only two subspecies are recognized as valid taxa:

L. r. rufus – east of the Great Plains
L. r. fasciatus – west of the Great Plains
Phylogeny
The genus Lynx shares a clade with the genera Puma, Prionailurus and Felis dated to 7.15 million years ago; Lynx diverged approximately 3.24 million years ago.
The bobcat is thought to have evolved from the Eurasian lynx (L. lynx), which crossed into North America by way of the Bering Land Bridge during the Pleistocene, with progenitors arriving as early as 2.6 million years ago. It first appeared during the Irvingtonian stage around 1.8 million years ago. The first bobcat wave moved into the southern portion of North America, which was soon cut off from the north by glaciers; the population evolved into the modern bobcat around 20,000 years ago. A second population arrived from Asia and settled in the north, developing into the modern Canada lynx (L. canadensis). Hybridization between the bobcat and the Canada lynx may sometimes occur.
The populations east and west of the Great Plains were probably separated during Pleistocene interglacial periods due to the aridification of the region.
Description
The bobcat resembles other species of the midsize genus Lynx, but is on average the smallest of the four. Its coat is variable, though generally tan to grayish-brown, with black streaks on the body and dark bars on the forelegs and tail. Its spotted patterning acts as camouflage. The ears are black-tipped and pointed, with short, black tufts. Generally, an off-white color is seen on the lips, chin, and underparts. Bobcats in the desert regions of the southwest have the lightest-colored coats, while those in the northern, forested regions are darkest. Kittens are born well-furred and already have their spots. A few melanistic bobcats have been sighted and captured in Florida, USA, and New Brunswick, Canada. They appear black, but may still exhibit a spot pattern.
The face appears wide due to ruffs of extended hair beneath the ears. Bobcat eyes are yellow with black slit pupils. The nose of the bobcat is pinkish-red, and it has a base color of gray or yellowish- or brownish-red on its face, sides, and back. The pupils widen during nocturnal activity to maximize light reception. The bobcat has sharp hearing and vision, and a good sense of smell. It is an excellent climber and swims when it needs to, but normally avoids water.
The adult bobcat is 47.5–125 cm (18.7–49.2 in) long from the head to the base of its distinctive stubby tail, averaging 82.7 cm (32.6 in); the tail is 9 to 20 cm (3.5 to 7.9 in) long.
Its "bobbed" appearance gives the species its name.
An adult stands about 30 to 60 cm (12 to 24 in) at the shoulders.
Adult males can range in weight from 6.4–18.3 kg (14–40 lb), with an average of 9.6 kg (21 lb); females at 4–15.3 kg (8.8–33.7 lb), with an average of 6.8 kg (15 lb). The largest bobcat accurately measured on record weighed 22.2 kg (49 lb), although unverified reports have them reaching 27 kg (60 lb). Furthermore, a June 20, 2012, report of a New Hampshire roadkill specimen listed the animal's weight at 27 kg (60 lb). The largest-bodied bobcats were recorded in eastern Canada and northern New England, and the smallest in the southern Appalachian Mountains.
Consistent with Bergmann's rule, the bobcat is larger in its northern range and in open habitats. A morphological size comparison study in the eastern United States found a divergence in the location of the largest male and female specimens, suggesting differing selection constraints for the sexes.
Skeletal muscles make up 58.5 % of the bobcat's body weight. At birth, it weighs 270–340 g (9+1⁄2–12 oz) and is about 25 cm (10 in) in length. At the age of one year, it weighs about 4.5 kg (10 lb).
Tracks
Bobcat tracks show four toes without claw marks, due to their retractile claws. The tracks range in size from 25–75 mm (1–3 in); the average is about 45 mm (1+3⁄4 in). When walking or trotting, the tracks are spaced roughly 20 to 45 cm (8 to 18 in) apart. The bobcat can make great strides when running, often from 1.2–2.4 m (4–8 ft).
Like all cats, the bobcat 'directly registers', meaning its hind prints usually fall exactly on top of its fore prints. Bobcat tracks can be generally distinguished from feral or house cat tracks by their larger size: about 15 cm2 (2 sq in) versus 10 cm2 (1+1⁄2 sq in).
Distribution and habitat
The bobcat is an adaptable species. It prefers woodlands—deciduous, coniferous, or mixed—but does not depend exclusively on the deep forest. It ranges from the humid swamps of Florida to desert lands of Texas or rugged mountain areas. It makes its home near agricultural areas, if rocky ledges, swamps, or forested tracts are present; its spotted coat serves as camouflage. The population of the bobcat depends primarily on the population of its prey; other principal factors in the selection of habitat type include protection from severe weather, availability of resting and den sites, dense cover for hunting and escape, and freedom from disturbance.
The bobcat's range does not seem to be limited by human populations, but by availability of suitable habitat; only large, intensively cultivated tracts are unsuitable for the species. The animal may appear in backyards in "urban edge" environments, where human development intersects with natural habitats. When chased by a dog, bobcats usually climb a tree.
The historical range of the bobcat was from southern Canada, throughout the United States, and as far south as the Mexican state of Oaxaca, and it persists across much of this area. In the 20th century, it was thought to have lost territory in the US Midwest and parts of the Northeast, including southern Minnesota, eastern South Dakota, and much of Missouri, mostly due to habitat changes from modern agricultural practices. While thought to no longer exist in western New York and Pennsylvania, multiple confirmed sightings of bobcats (including dead specimens) have been recently reported in New York's Southern Tier and in central New York, and a bobcat was captured in 2018 on a tourist boat in Downtown Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. In addition, bobcat sightings have been confirmed in northern Indiana, and one was killed near Albion, Michigan, in 2008. In early March 2010, a bobcat was sighted (and later captured by animal control authorities) in a parking garage in Downtown Houston. By 2010, bobcats appear to have recolonized many states, occurring in every state in the contiguous 48 except Delaware.
The bobcat population in Canada is limited due to both snow depth and the presence of the Canada lynx. The bobcat does not tolerate deep snow, and waits out heavy storms in sheltered areas; it lacks the large, padded feet of the Canada lynx and cannot support its weight on snow as efficiently. The bobcat is not entirely at a disadvantage where its range meets that of the larger felid: displacement of the Canada lynx by the aggressive bobcat has been observed where they interact in Nova Scotia. At the same time, the clearing of coniferous forests for agriculture has led to a northward retreat of the Canada lynx's range to the advantage of the bobcat. In northern and central Mexico, the cat is found in dry scrubland and forests of pine and oak; its range ends at the tropical southern portion of the country.
Behavior and ecology
The bobcat is crepuscular and is active mostly during twilight. It keeps on the move from three hours before sunset until about midnight, and then again from before dawn until three hours after sunrise. Each night, it moves from 3 to 11 km (2 to 7 mi) along its habitual route. This behavior may vary seasonally, as bobcats become more diurnal during fall and winter in response to the activity of their prey, which are more active during the day in colder weather.
Social structure and home range
Bobcat activities are confined to well-defined territories, which vary in size depending on the sex and the distribution of prey. The home range is marked with feces, urine scent, and by clawing prominent trees in the area. In its territory, the bobcat has numerous places of shelter, usually a main den, and several auxiliary shelters on the outer extent of its range, such as hollow logs, brush piles, thickets, or under rock ledges. Its den smells strongly of the bobcat.
The sizes of bobcats' home ranges vary significantly from 0.596–326 km2 (0.23–126 sq mi).
One study in Kansas found resident males to have ranges of roughly 21 km2 (8 sq mi), and females less than half that area. Transient bobcats were found to have home ranges of 57 km2 (22 sq mi) and less well-defined home ranges. Kittens had the smallest range at about 8 km2 (3 sq mi). Dispersal from the natal range is most pronounced with males.
Reports on seasonal variation in range size have been equivocal. One study found a large variation in male range sizes, from 41 km2 (16 sq mi) in summer up to 104 km2 (40 sq mi) in winter. Another found that female bobcats, especially those which were reproductively active, expanded their home range in winter, but that males merely shifted their range without expanding it, which was consistent with numerous earlier studies. Other research in various American states has shown little or no seasonal variation.
Like most felines, the bobcat is largely solitary, but ranges often overlap. Unusual for cats, males are more tolerant of overlap, while females rarely wander into others' ranges. Given their smaller range sizes, two or more females may reside within a male's home range. When multiple territories overlap, a dominance hierarchy is often established, resulting in the exclusion of some transients from favored areas.
In line with widely differing estimates of home range size, population density figures diverge from one to 38 bobcats per 26 km2 (10 sq mi) in one survey. The average is estimated at one bobcat per 13 km2 (5 sq mi). A link has been observed between population density and sex ratio. An unhunted population in California had a sex ratio of 2.1 males per female. When the density decreased, the sex ratio skewed to 0.86 males per female. Another study observed a similar ratio and suggested the males may be better able to cope with the increased competition, and this helped limit reproduction until various factors lowered the density.
Hunting and diet
The bobcat is able to survive for long periods without food, but eats heavily when prey is abundant. During lean periods, it often preys on larger animals, which it can kill and return to feed on later. The bobcat hunts by stalking its prey and then ambushing with a short chase or pounce. Its preference is for mammals weighing about 0.7–6 kg (1+1⁄2–12+1⁄2 lb). Its main prey varies by region: in the eastern United States, it is the eastern cottontail and New England cottontail, and in the north, it is the snowshoe hare.
When these prey species exist together, as in New England, they are the primary food sources of the bobcat. In the far south, the rabbits and hares are sometimes replaced by cotton rats as the primary food source. Birds up to the size of an adult trumpeter swan are also taken in ambushes while nesting, along with their fledglings and eggs. The bobcat is an opportunistic predator that, unlike the more specialized Canada lynx, readily varies its prey selection. Diet diversification positively correlates to a decline in numbers of the bobcat's principal prey; the abundance of its main prey species is the main determinant of overall diet.

The bobcat hunts animals of different sizes, and adjusts its hunting techniques accordingly. It hunts in areas abundant in prey and waits lying or crouching for victims to wander close. It then pounces and grabs the prey with its sharp, retractable claws. For slightly larger animals, such as geese, ducks, rabbits and hares, it stalks from cover and waits until prey comes within 6 to 11 m (20 to 35 ft) before rushing in to attack. Less commonly, it feeds on larger animals, such as young ungulates, and other carnivores, such as primarily female fishers, gray foxes, American minks, American martens, skunks, raccoons, small dogs and domestic cats. It also hunts rodents such as squirrels, moles, muskrats, mice, but also birds, small sharks, and insects. Bobcats occasionally hunt livestock and poultry. While larger species, such as cattle and horses, are not known to be attacked, bobcats do present a threat to smaller ruminants such as pigs, sheep and goats. According to the National Agricultural Statistics Service, bobcats killed 11,100 sheep in 2004, comprising 4.9% of all sheep predator deaths. However, some amount of bobcat predation may be misidentified, as bobcats have been known to scavenge on the remains of livestock kills by other animals.
It has been known to kill deer or pronghorn, and sometimes to hunt elk in western North America, especially in winter when smaller prey is scarce, or when deer populations become more abundant. One study in the Everglades showed a large majority of kills (33 of 39) were fawns. In Yellowstone, a large number of kills (15 of 20) were elk calves, but prey up to eight times the bobcat's weight could be successfully taken. It stalks the deer, often when the deer is lying down, then rushes in and grabs it by the neck before biting the throat, base of the skull, or chest. On the rare occasions a bobcat kills a deer, it eats its fill and then buries the carcass under snow or leaves, often returning to it several times to feed.
The bobcat prey base overlaps with that of other midsized predators of a similar ecological niche. Research in Maine has shown little evidence of competitive relationships between the bobcat and coyote or red fox; separation distances and territory overlap appeared random among simultaneously monitored animals. However, other studies have found bobcat populations may decrease in areas with high coyote populations, with the more social inclination of the canid giving them a possible competitive advantage. With the Canada lynx, however, the interspecific relationship affects distribution patterns; competitive exclusion by the bobcat is likely to have prevented any further southward expansion of the range of its felid relative.
Reproduction and life cycle
The average lifespan of the bobcat is seven years but rarely exceeds 10 years. The oldest wild bobcat on record was 16 years old, and the oldest captive bobcat lived to be 32.
Bobcats generally begin breeding by their second summer, though females may start as early as their first year. Sperm production begins each year by September or October, and the male is fertile into the summer. A dominant male travels with a female and mates with her several times, generally from winter until early spring; this varies by location, but most mating takes place during February and March. The pair may undertake a number of different behaviors, including bumping, chasing, and ambushing.
Other males may be in attendance, but remain uninvolved. Once the male recognizes the female is receptive, he grasps her in the typical felid neck grip and mates with her. The female may later go on to mate with other males, and males generally mate with several females. During courtship, the bobcat's vocalizations include screaming and hissing. Research in Texas revealed that establishing a home range is necessary for breeding; studied animals without a home range had no identified offspring. The female has an estrous cycle of 44 days, with the estrus lasting five to ten days. Bobcats remain reproductively active throughout their lives.
The female raises the young alone. One to six, but usually two to four, kittens are born in April or May, after roughly 60 to 70 days of gestation. Sometimes, a second litter is born as late as September. The female generally gives birth in an enclosed space, usually a small cave or hollow log. The young open their eyes by the ninth or tenth day. They start exploring their surroundings at four weeks and are weaned at about two months. Within three to five months, they begin to travel with their mother. They hunt by themselves by the fall of their first year, and usually disperse shortly thereafter. In Michigan, however, they have been observed staying with their mother as late as the next spring.
Predators
The adult bobcat has relatively few predators. Rarely, however, it may be killed in interspecific conflict by several larger predators or fall prey to them. Cougars and gray wolves can kill adult bobcats, a behavior repeatedly observed in Yellowstone National Park. Coyotes have killed adult bobcats and kittens. At least one confirmed observation of a bobcat and an American black bear (Ursus americanus) fighting over a carcass is confirmed. Like other Lynx species, bobcats probably avoid encounters with bears, in part because they are likely to lose kills to them or may rarely be attacked by them. Bobcat remains have occasionally been found in the resting sites of male fishers. American alligators (Alligator mississippensis) have been filmed opportunistically preying on adult bobcats in the southeast United States. Golden eagles (Aquila chrysaetos) have been reportedly observed preying on bobcats.

Kittens may be taken by several predators, including great horned owls, eagles, foxes, and bears, and other adult male bobcats. When prey populations are not abundant, fewer kittens are likely to reach adulthood.
Diseases, accidents, hunters, automobiles, and starvation are the other leading causes of death. Juveniles show high mortality shortly after leaving their mothers, while still perfecting their hunting techniques. One study of 15 bobcats showed yearly survival rates for both sexes averaged 0.62, in line with other research suggesting rates of 0.56 to 0.67. Cannibalism has been reported; kittens may be taken when prey levels are low, but this is very rare and does not much influence the population.
The bobcat may have external parasites, mostly ticks and fleas, and often carries the parasites of its prey, especially those of rabbits and squirrels. Internal parasites (endoparasites) are especially common in bobcats. One study found an average infection rate of 52% from Toxoplasma gondii, but with great regional variation. One mite in particular, Lynxacarus morlani, has to date been found only on the bobcat. Parasites' and diseases' role in the mortality of the bobcat is still unclear, but they may account for greater mortality than starvation, accidents, and predation.
Conservation
The bobcat is listed in Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), which means it is not considered threatened with extinction, but that international trade must be closely monitored. The animal is regulated in all three of its range countries, and is found in a number of protected areas of the United States, its principal territory. Estimates from the US Fish and Wildlife Service placed bobcat numbers between 700,000 and 1,500,000 in the US in 1988, with increased range and population density suggesting even greater numbers in subsequent years; for these reasons, the U.S. has petitioned CITES to remove the cat from Appendix II. Populations in Canada and Mexico remain stable and healthy. It is listed as least concern on the IUCN Red List, noting it is relatively widespread and abundant, but information from southern Mexico is poor.
The bobcat is considered endangered in Ohio, Indiana, and New Jersey. It was removed from the threatened list of Illinois in 1999 and of Iowa in 2003. In Pennsylvania, limited hunting and trapping are once again allowed, after having been banned from 1970 to 1999. The bobcat also suffered population decline in New Jersey at the turn of the 19th century, mainly because of commercial and agricultural developments causing habitat fragmentation; by 1972, the bobcat was given full legal protection, and was listed as endangered in the state in 1991. The Mexican bobcat L. r. escuinipae was for a time considered endangered by the US Fish and Wildlife Service, but was delisted in 2005. Between 2003 and 2011, a reduction in bobcat sightings in the Everglades by 87.5% has been attributed to predation by the invasive Burmese python.
The bobcat has long been valued both for fur and sport; it has been hunted and trapped by humans, but has maintained a high population, even in the southern United States, where it is extensively hunted. In the 1970s and 1980s, an unprecedented rise in price for bobcat fur caused further interest in hunting, but by the early 1990s, prices had dropped significantly. Regulated hunting continues, with half of mortality of some populations being attributed to this cause. As a result, the rate of bobcat deaths is skewed in winter, when hunting season is generally open.
Urbanization can result in the fragmentation of contiguous natural landscapes into patchy habitat within an urban area. Animals that live in these fragmented areas often have reduced movement between the habitat patches, which can lead to reduced gene flow and pathogen transmission between patches. Animals such as the bobcat are particularly sensitive to fragmentation because of their large home ranges. A study in coastal Southern California has shown bobcat populations are affected by urbanization, creation of roads, and other developments. The populations may not be declining as much as predicted, but instead the connectivity of different populations is affected. This leads to a decrease in natural genetic diversity among bobcat populations. For bobcats, preserving open space in sufficient quantities and quality is necessary for population viability. Educating residents about the animals is critical, as well, for conservation in urban areas.
In bobcats using urban habitats in California, the use of rodenticides has been linked to both secondary poisoning by consuming poisoned rats and mice, and to increased rates of severe mite infestation (known as notoedric mange), as an animal with a poison-weakened immune system is less capable of fighting off mange. Liver autopsies in California bobcats that have succumbed to notoedric mange have revealed chronic rodenticide exposure. Alternative rodent control measures such as vegetation control and use of traps have been suggested to alleviate this issue.
Importance in human culture
Stories featuring the bobcat, in many variations, are found in some Indigenous cultures of North America, with parallels in South America. A story from the Nez Perce, for instance, depicts the bobcat and coyote as opposed, antithetical beings. However, another version represents them with equality and identicality. Claude Lévi-Strauss argues that the former concept, that of twins representing opposites, is an inherent theme in New World mythologies, but that they are not equally balanced figures, representing an open-ended dualism rather than the symmetric duality of Old World cultures. The latter notion then, Lévi-Strauss suggests, is the result of regular contact between Europeans and native cultures. Additionally, the version found in the Nez Perce story is of much greater complexity, while the version of equality seems to have lost the tale's original meaning.

In a Shawnee tale, the bobcat is outwitted by a rabbit, which gives rise to its spots. After trapping the rabbit in a tree, the bobcat is persuaded to build a fire, only to have the embers scattered on its fur, leaving it singed with dark brown spots. The Mohave people believed dreaming habitually of beings or objects would afford them their characteristics as supernatural powers. Dreaming of two deities, cougar and lynx, they thought, would grant them the superior hunting skills of other tribes. European-descended inhabitants of the Americas also admired the cat, both for its ferocity and its grace, and in the United States, it "rests prominently in the anthology of ... national folklore".
Grave artifacts from dirt domes excavated in the 1980s along the Illinois River revealed a complete skeleton of a young bobcat along with a collar made of bone pendants and shell beads that had been buried by the Hopewell culture. The type and place of burial indicate a tamed and cherished pet or possible spiritual significance. The Hopewell normally buried their dogs, so the bones were initially identified as remains of a puppy. Still, dogs were usually buried close to the village and not in the mounds themselves. This is the only wild cat decorated burial on the archaeological record.
An inhabitant of Appalachia, Lynx rufus is immortalized (along with university founder Rufus Putnam) at Ohio University through its popular college mascot, Rufus the Bobcat.


Ruminants are herbivorous grazing or browsing artiodactyls belonging to the suborder Ruminantia that are able to acquire nutrients from plant-based food by fermenting it in a specialized stomach prior to digestion, principally through microbial actions. The process, which takes place in the front part of the digestive system and therefore is called foregut fermentation, typically requires the fermented ingesta (known as cud) to be regurgitated and chewed again. The process of rechewing the ingesta to further break down plant matter and stimulate digestion is called rumination or chewing the cud. The word ruminant comes from the Latin rūminārī, "to ruminate", from rūmen, the first stomach.
The roughly 200 species of ruminants include both domestic and wild species. Ruminating mammals include cattle, all domesticated and wild bovines, goats, sheep, giraffes, deer, gazelles, and antelopes. It has also been suggested that notoungulates also relied on rumination, as opposed to other atlantogenatans that rely on the more typical hindgut fermentation, though this is not entirely certain.
Ruminants represent the most diverse group of living ungulates. The suborder Ruminantia includes six different families: Tragulidae, Giraffidae, Antilocapridae, Cervidae, Moschidae, and Bovidae.
Taxonomy and evolution
The first fossil ruminants appeared in the Early Eocene and were small, likely omnivorous, forest-dwellers. Artiodactyls with cranial appendages first occur in the early Miocene.
Phylogeny
Ruminantia is a crown group of ruminants within the order Artiodactyla, cladistically defined by Spaulding et al. as "the least inclusive clade that includes Bos taurus (cow) and Tragulus napu (mouse deer)". Ruminantiamorpha is a higher-level clade of artiodactyls, cladistically defined by Spaulding et al. as "Ruminantia plus all extinct taxa more closely related to extant members of Ruminantia than to any other living species." This is a stem-based definition for Ruminantiamorpha, and is more inclusive than the crown group Ruminantia. As a crown group, Ruminantia only includes the last common ancestor of all extant (living) ruminants and their descendants (living or extinct), whereas Ruminantiamorpha, as a stem group, also includes more basal extinct ruminant ancestors that are more closely related to living ruminants than to other members of Artiodactyla. When considering only living taxa (neontology), this makes Ruminantiamorpha and Ruminantia synonymous, and only Ruminantia is used. Thus, Ruminantiamorpha is only used in the context of paleontology. Accordingly, Spaulding grouped some genera of the extinct family Anthracotheriidae within Ruminantiamorpha (but not in Ruminantia), but placed others within Ruminantiamorpha's sister clade, Cetancodontamorpha.
Ruminantia's placement within Artiodactyla can be represented in the following cladogram:

Within Ruminantia, the Tragulidae (mouse-deer) are considered the most basal family, with the remaining ruminants classified as belonging to the infraorder Pecora. Until the beginning of the 21st century, it was understood that the family Moschidae (musk deer) was sister to Cervidae. However, a 2003 phylogenetic study by Alexandre Hassanin (of National Museum of Natural History, France) and colleagues, based on mitochondrial and nuclear analyses, revealed that Moschidae and Bovidae form a clade sister to Cervidae. According to the study, Cervidae diverged from the Bovidae-Moschidae clade 27 to 28 million years ago. The following cladogram is based on a large-scale genome ruminant genome sequence study from 2019:
Classification
Order Artiodactyla
Suborder Tylopoda: camels and llamas, 7 living species in 3 genera
Suborder Suina: pigs and peccaries
Suborder Cetruminantia: ruminants, whales and hippos
Clade Ruminantia
Infraorder Tragulina (paraphyletic)
Family †Leptomerycidae
Family †Hypertragulidae
Family †Praetragulidae
Family †Gelocidae
Family †Bachitheriidae
Family Tragulidae: chevrotains, 6 living species in 4 genera
Family †Archaeomerycidae
Family †Lophiomerycidae
Infraorder Pecora
Family Cervidae: deer and moose, 49 living species in 16 genera
Family †Palaeomerycidae
Family †Dromomerycidae
Family †Hoplitomerycidae
Family †Climacoceratidae
Family Giraffidae: giraffe and okapi, 2 living species in 2 genera
Family Antilocapridae: pronghorn, one living species in one genus
Family Moschidae: musk deer, 4 living species in one genus
Family Bovidae: cattle, goats, sheep, and antelope, 143 living species in 53 genera
Digestive system of ruminants
Hofmann and Stewart divided ruminants into three major categories based on their feed type and feeding habits: concentrate selectors, intermediate types, and grass/roughage eaters, with the assumption that feeding habits in ruminants cause morphological differences in their digestive systems, including salivary glands, rumen size, and rumen papillae. However, Woodall found that there is little correlation between the fiber content of a ruminant's diet and morphological characteristics, meaning that the categorical divisions of ruminants by Hofmann and Stewart warrant further research.
Also, some mammals are pseudoruminants, which have a three-compartment stomach instead of four like ruminants. The Hippopotamidae (comprising hippopotamuses) are well-known examples. Pseudoruminants, like traditional ruminants, are foregut fermentors and most ruminate or chew cud. However, their anatomy and method of digestion differs significantly from that of a four-chambered ruminant.
Monogastric herbivores, such as rhinoceroses, horses, guinea pigs, and rabbits, are not ruminants, as they have a simple single-chambered stomach. Being hindgut fermenters, these animals ferment cellulose in an enlarged cecum. In smaller hindgut fermenters of the order Lagomorpha (rabbits, hares, and pikas), and Caviomorph rodents (Guinea pigs, capybaras, etc.), material from the cecum is formed into cecotropes, passed through the large intestine, expelled and subsequently reingested to absorb nutrients in the cecotropes.

The primary difference between ruminants and nonruminants is that ruminants' stomachs have four compartments:

rumen—primary site of microbial fermentation
reticulum
omasum—receives chewed cud, and absorbs volatile fatty acids
abomasum—true stomach
The first two chambers are the rumen and the reticulum. These two compartments make up the fermentation vat and are the major site of microbial activity. Fermentation is crucial to digestion because it breaks down complex carbohydrates, such as cellulose, and enables the animal to use them. Microbes function best in a warm, moist, anaerobic environment with a temperature range of 37.7 to 42.2 °C (99.9 to 108.0 °F) and a pH between 6.0 and 6.4. Without the help of microbes, ruminants would not be able to use nutrients from forages. The food is mixed with saliva and separates into layers of solid and liquid material. Solids clump together to form the cud or bolus.
The cud is then regurgitated and chewed to completely mix it with saliva and to break down the particle size. Smaller particle size allows for increased nutrient absorption. Fiber, especially cellulose and hemicellulose, is primarily broken down in these chambers by microbes (mostly bacteria, as well as some protozoa, fungi, and yeast) into the three volatile fatty acids (VFAs): acetic acid, propionic acid, and butyric acid. Protein and nonstructural carbohydrate (pectin, sugars, and starches) are also fermented. Saliva is very important because it provides liquid for the microbial population, recirculates nitrogen and minerals, and acts as a buffer for the rumen pH. The type of feed the animal consumes affects the amount of saliva that is produced.
Though the rumen and reticulum have different names, they have very similar tissue layers and textures, making it difficult to visually separate them. They also perform similar tasks. Together, these chambers are called the reticulorumen. The degraded digesta, which is now in the lower liquid part of the reticulorumen, then passes into the next chamber, the omasum. This chamber controls what is able to pass into the abomasum. It keeps the particle size as small as possible in order to pass into the abomasum. The omasum also absorbs volatile fatty acids and ammonia.
After this, the digesta is moved to the true stomach, the abomasum. This is the gastric compartment of the ruminant stomach. The abomasum is the direct equivalent of the monogastric stomach, and digesta is digested here in much the same way. This compartment releases acids and enzymes that further digest the material passing through. This is also where the ruminant digests the microbes produced in the rumen. Digesta is finally moved into the small intestine, where the digestion and absorption of nutrients occurs. The small intestine is the main site of nutrient absorption. The surface area of the digesta is greatly increased here because of the villi that are in the small intestine. This increased surface area allows for greater nutrient absorption. Microbes produced in the reticulorumen are also digested in the small intestine. After the small intestine is the large intestine. The major roles here are breaking down mainly fiber by fermentation with microbes, absorption of water (ions and minerals) and other fermented products, and also expelling waste. Fermentation continues in the large intestine in the same way as in the reticulorumen.
Only small amounts of glucose are absorbed from dietary carbohydrates. Most dietary carbohydrates are fermented into VFAs in the rumen. The glucose needed as energy for the brain and for lactose and milk fat in milk production, as well as other uses, comes from nonsugar sources, such as the VFA propionate, glycerol, lactate, and protein. The VFA propionate is used for around 70% of the glucose and glycogen produced and protein for another 20% (50% under starvation conditions).
Abundance, distribution, and domestication
Wild ruminants number at least 75 million and are native to all continents except Antarctica and Australia. Nearly 90% of all species are found in Eurasia and Africa. Species inhabit a wide range of climates (from tropic to arctic) and habitats (from open plains to forests).
The population of domestic ruminants is greater than 3.5 billion, with cattle, sheep, and goats accounting for about 95% of the total population. Goats were domesticated in the Near East c. 8000 BC. Most other species were domesticated by 2500 BC., either in the Near East or southern Asia.
Ruminant physiology
Ruminating animals have various physiological features that enable them to survive in nature. One feature of ruminants is their continuously growing teeth. During grazing, the silica content in forage causes abrasion of the teeth. This is compensated for by continuous tooth growth throughout the ruminant's life, as opposed to humans or other nonruminants, whose teeth stop growing after a particular age. Most ruminants do not have upper incisors; instead, they have a thick dental pad to thoroughly chew plant-based food. Another feature of ruminants is the large ruminal storage capacity that gives them the ability to consume feed rapidly and complete the chewing process later. This is known as rumination, which consists of the regurgitation of feed, rechewing, resalivation, and reswallowing. Rumination reduces particle size, which enhances microbial function and allows the digesta to pass more easily through the digestive tract.
Unlike camelids, ruminants copulate in a standing position and are not induced ovulators.
Rumen microbiology
Vertebrates lack the ability to hydrolyse the beta [1–4] glycosidic bond of plant cellulose due to the lack of the enzyme cellulase. Thus, ruminants completely depend on the microbial flora, present in the rumen or hindgut, to digest cellulose. Digestion of food in the rumen is primarily carried out by the rumen microflora, which contains dense populations of several species of bacteria, protozoa, sometimes yeasts and other fungi – 1 ml of rumen is estimated to contain 10–50 billion bacteria and 1 million protozoa, as well as several yeasts and fungi.
Since the environment inside a rumen is anaerobic, most of these microbial species are obligate or facultative anaerobes that can decompose complex plant material, such as cellulose, hemicellulose, starch, and proteins. The hydrolysis of cellulose results in sugars, which are further fermented to acetate, lactate, propionate, butyrate, carbon dioxide, and methane.
As bacteria conduct fermentation in the rumen, they consume about 10% of the carbon, 60% of the phosphorus, and 80% of the nitrogen that the ruminant ingests. To reclaim these nutrients, the ruminant then digests the bacteria in the abomasum. The enzyme lysozyme has adapted to facilitate digestion of bacteria in the ruminant abomasum. Pancreatic ribonuclease also degrades bacterial RNA in the ruminant small intestine as a source of nitrogen.
During grazing, ruminants produce large amounts of saliva – estimates range from 100 to 150 litres of saliva per day for a cow. The role of saliva is to provide ample fluid for rumen fermentation and to act as a buffering agent. Rumen fermentation produces large amounts of organic acids, thus maintaining the appropriate pH of rumen fluids is a critical factor in rumen fermentation. After digesta passes through the rumen, the omasum absorbs excess fluid so that digestive enzymes and acid in the abomasum are not diluted.
Tannin toxicity in ruminant animals
Tannins are phenolic compounds that are commonly found in plants. Found in the leaf, bud, seed, root, and stem tissues, tannins are widely distributed in many different species of plants. Tannins are separated into two classes: hydrolysable tannins and condensed tannins. Depending on their concentration and nature, either class can have adverse or beneficial effects. Tannins can be beneficial, having been shown to increase milk production, wool growth, ovulation rate, and lambing percentage, as well as reducing bloat risk and reducing internal parasite burdens.
Tannins can be toxic to ruminants, in that they precipitate proteins, making them unavailable for digestion, and they inhibit the absorption of nutrients by reducing the populations of proteolytic rumen bacteria. Very high levels of tannin intake can produce toxicity that can even cause death. Animals that normally consume tannin-rich plants can develop defensive mechanisms against tannins, such as the strategic deployment of lipids and extracellular polysaccharides that have a high affinity to binding to tannins. Some ruminants (goats, deer, elk, moose) are able to consume food high in tannins (leaves, twigs, bark) due to the presence in their saliva of tannin-binding proteins.
Religious importance
The Law of Moses in the Bible allowed the eating of some mammals that had cloven hooves (i.e. members of the order Artiodactyla) and "that chew the cud", a stipulation preserved to this day in Jewish dietary laws and also the dietary laws of the Samaritans, the Sacred Name movements and of denominations that follow the same dietary laws, such as the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahado Church, the Seventh Day Adventists, the Philadelphia Church of God, and some other denominations.
Other uses
The verb 'to ruminate' has been extended metaphorically to mean to ponder thoughtfully or to meditate on some topic. Similarly, ideas may be 'chewed on' or 'digested'. 'Chew the cud', or 'Chew one's cud', is to reflect or meditate. In psychology, "rumination" refers to a pattern of thinking, and is unrelated to digestive physiology.
Ruminants and climate change
Methane is produced by a type of archaea, called methanogens, as described above within the rumen, and this methane is released to the atmosphere. The rumen is the major site of methane production in ruminants. Methane is a strong greenhouse gas with a global warming potential of 86 compared to CO2 over a 20-year period.
As a by-product of consuming cellulose, cattle belch out methane, there-by returning that carbon sequestered by plants back into the atmosphere. After about 10 to 12 years, that methane is broken down and converted back to CO2. Once converted to CO2, plants can again perform photosynthesis and fix that carbon back into cellulose. From here, cattle can eat the plants and the cycle begins once again. In essence, the methane belched from cattle is not adding new carbon to the atmosphere. Rather it is part of the natural cycling of carbon through the biogenic carbon cycle.
In 2010, enteric fermentation accounted for 43% of the total greenhouse gas emissions from all agricultural activity in the world, 26% of the total greenhouse gas emissions from agricultural activity in the U.S., and 22% of the total U.S. methane emissions. The meat from domestically raised ruminants has a higher carbon equivalent footprint than other meats or vegetarian sources of protein based on a global meta-analysis of lifecycle assessment studies. Methane production by meat animals, principally ruminants, is estimated 15–20% global production of methane, unless the animals were hunted in the wild. The current U.S. domestic beef and dairy cattle population is around 90 million head, approximately 50% higher than the peak wild population of American bison of 60 million head in the 1700s, which primarily roamed the part of North America that now makes up the United States.


This page gives a list of domesticated animals, also including a list of animals which are or may be currently undergoing the process of domestication and animals that have an extensive relationship with humans beyond simple predation. This includes species which are semi-domesticated, undomesticated but captive-bred on a commercial scale, or commonly wild-caught, at least occasionally captive-bred, and tameable. In order to be considered fully domesticated, most species have undergone significant genetic, behavioural and morphological changes from their wild ancestors, while others have changed very little from their wild ancestors despite hundreds or thousands of years of potential selective breeding. Many factors determine how quickly any changes may occur in a species, but there is not always a desire to improve a species from its wild form. Domestication is a gradual process, so there is no precise moment in the history of a given species when it can be considered to have become fully domesticated.
Zooarchaeology has identified three classes of animal domesticates:

Pets (dogs, cats, ferrets, hamsters, etc.)
Livestock (cattle, sheep, pigs, goats, etc.)
Working animal (horses, camels, donkeys, etc.)
Domesticated animalsTame, partially domesticated, and widely captive-bred animals
Please, someone who knows how, add fruit bats to the list. Due to the somewhat unclear outlines of what precisely constitutes domestication, there are some species that may or may not be fully domesticated. There are also some species that are extensively commercially used by humans, but are not significantly altered from wild-type animals. Many animals on this second table are at least somewhat altered from wild-type animals due to their extensive interactions with humans, albeit not to the point that they are regarded as distinct forms (therefore, no separate wild ancestors are noted) or would be unable to survive if reintroduced to the wild.
Taxonomical groupings
The categories used in the Taxon group column are:

1a: Artiodactyla except Bovidae, 1b: Bovidae, 1c: Carnivora, 1d: Rodentia, 1e: Other mammals
2a: Anseriformes, 2b: Galliformes, 2c: Columbiformes, 2d: Passeriformes, 2e: Psittaciformes, 2f: Palaeognathae, 2g: Accipitridae, 2h: Other birds
3a: Serpentes, 3b: Lacertilia, 3c:  Testudines, 3d: Other reptiles
4a: Anura, 4b: Other amphibians
5a: Cyprinidae, 5b: Carangiformes , 5c: Anabantiformes, 5d: Salmonidae, 5e: Other fish
6a: Hymenoptera, 6b: Lepidoptera, 6c: Blattodea, 6d: Other insects, 6e: Other arthropods
7a: Mollusca, 7b: Annelida, 7c: Other animals


The South American foxes (Lycalopex), commonly called raposa in Portuguese, or zorro in Spanish, are a genus inhabiting South America. Despite their name, they are not true foxes, but are a unique canid genus more closely related to wolves and jackals than to true foxes; some of them resemble foxes due to convergent evolution. The South American gray fox, Lycalopex griseus, is the most common species, and is known for its large ears and a highly marketable, russet-fringed pelt.
The second-oldest known fossils belonging to the genus were discovered in Chile, and date from 2.0 to 2.5 million years ago, in the mid- to late Pliocene. The Vorohué Formation of Argentina has provided older fossils, dating to the Uquian to Ensenadan (Late Pliocene).
Names
The common English word "zorro" is a loan word from Spanish, with the word originally meaning "fox". Current usage lists Pseudalopex (literally: "false fox") as synonymous with Lycalopex ("wolf fox"), with the latter taking precedence. In 1895, Allen classified Pseudalopex as a subgenus of Canis, establishing the combination Canis (Pseudalopex), a name still used in the fossil record.
Species
Species currently included in this genus include:

In 1914, Oldfield Thomas established the genus Dusicyon, in which he included these zorros. They were later reclassified to Lycalopex (via Pseudalopex) by Langguth in 1975.
Phylogeny
The following phylogenetic tree shows the evolutionary relationships between the Lycalopex species, based on molecular analysis of mitochondrial DNA control region sequences.
Relationship with humans
The zorros are hunted in Argentina for their durable, soft pelts. They are also often labelled 'lamb-killers'.
In his diary of his well-known 1952 traveling with the young Che Guevara, Alberto Granado mentions talking with seasonal workers employed on vast sheep farms, who told him of a successful campaign by the ranch owners to exterminate the foxes who were preying on lambs. The ranchers offered a reward of one Argentinian peso for the body of a dead male fox and as much as five pesos for a female fox; to impoverished workers in the early 1950s, five pesos were a significant sum. Within a few years, foxes became virtually extinct in a large part of Argentina.
The Fuegian dog (Spanish: perro yagán, perro fueguino), also known as the Yaghan dog, was a domesticated form of the culpeo (Lycalopex culpaeus), unlike other domesticated canids which were dogs and silver foxes. This means different canid species have been domesticated multiple times by humans independently.


There are at least 18 large mammal and 103 small mammal species known to occur in Wyoming.
Species are listed by common name, scientific name, typical habitat and occurrence. The common and scientific names come from the American Society of Mammalogists' Wyoming Mammal List.
Large and medium sized mammalsGrizzly bear
Order: Carnivora, Family: Ursidae
Black bear
Order: Carnivora, Family: Ursidae
Occurrence: Forests, slide areas, alpine meadows
The American black bear (Ursus americanus) is North America's smallest and most common species of bear. It is a generalist animal, being able to exploit numerous different habitats and foodstuffs. The American black bear is listed by the IUCN as being of least concern, due to the species widespread distribution and a large global population estimated to be twice that of all other bear species combined.
Bighorn sheep
Order: Artiodactyla, Family: Bovidae
Occurrence: Open mountainous areas
The bighorn sheep (Ovis canadensis) is a species of sheep in North America with large horns. The horns can weigh up to 30 pounds (14 kg), while the sheep themselves weigh up to 300 pounds (140 kg).
American bison
Order: Artiodactyla, Family: Bovidae
Occurrence: Eastside parklands and prairies
The American bison (Bison bison) is a North American species of bison, also commonly known as the American buffalo. These bison once roamed the grasslands of North America in massive herds; their range roughly formed a triangle between the Great Bear Lake in Canada's far northwest, south to the Mexican states of Durango and Nuevo León, and east along the western boundary of the Appalachian Mountains. Today these bison are much fewer in number, and travel only in small herds.
In 1985, the American bison was declared the state mammal of Wyoming.
Bobcat
Order: Carnivora, Family: Felidae
Occurrence: Open forests, brushy areas
The bobcat (Lynx rufus) is a North American mammal of the cat family, Felidae. With twelve recognized subspecies, it ranges from southern Canada to northern Mexico, including most of the continental United States. The bobcat is an adaptable predator that inhabits wooded areas, as well as semi-desert, urban edge, forest edges and swampland environments. It persists in much of its original range and populations are healthy.
Coyote
Order: Carnivora, Family: Canidae
Occurrence: Forests, grasslands
The coyote ( or ) (Canis latrans), also known as the American jackal or the prairie wolf, is a species of canid found throughout North and Central America, ranging from Panama in the south, north through Mexico, the United States and Canada. It occurs as far north as Alaska and all but the northernmost portions of Canada.
Elk
Order: Artiodactyla, Family: Cervidae
Occurrence: Open forests, meadows, fields
The elk or wapiti (Cervus canadensis) is one of the largest species of deer in the world and one of the largest mammals in North America and eastern Asia. In the deer family (Cervidae), only the moose, Alces alces (called an "elk" in Europe), is larger, and Cervus unicolor (the sambar deer) can rival the C. canadensis elk in size. Elk range in forest and forest-edge habitat, feeding on grasses, plants, leaves, and bark.
Gray fox
Order: Carnivora, Family: Canidae
Occurrence: Deciduous forests, cottonwood riparian, basin-prairie shrublands, sagebrush-grasslands, riparian shrub,
grasslands, agricultural areas, rock outcrops, roadside/railroad banks.
The gray fox (Urocyon cinereoargenteus) ranges throughout most of the southern half of North America from southern Canada to the northern part of South America (Venezuela and Colombia).
Gray wolf
Order: Carnivora, Family: Canidae
Occurrence: Coniferous forests
The gray wolf (Canis lupus), often known simply as the wolf, is the largest wild member of the family Canidae. It is an ice age survivor originating during the Late Pleistocene around 300,000 years ago. DNA sequencing and genetic drift studies reaffirm that the gray wolf shares a common ancestry with the domestic dog (Canis lupus familiaris). Although certain aspects of this conclusion have been questioned, the main body of evidence confirms it. A number of other gray wolf subspecies have been identified, though the actual number of subspecies is still open to discussion. Gray wolves are typically apex predators in the ecosystems they occupy.
Canada lynx
Order: Carnivora, Family: Felidae
Occurrence: Coniferous forests
The Canada lynx (Lynx canadensis) is a North American mammal of the cat family, Felidae. It is a close relative of the Eurasian lynx (Lynx lynx). Some authorities regard both as conspecific. However, in some characteristics the Canadian lynx is more like the bobcat (Lynx rufus) than the Eurasian lynx. With the recognized subspecies, it ranges across Canada and into Alaska as well as some parts of the northern United States.
Moose
Order: Artiodactyla, Family: Cervidae
Occurrence: Coniferous forests, lakes, slow streams, marshy areas
The moose (North America) or common European elk (Europe) (Alces alces) is the largest extant species in the deer family. Moose are distinguished by the palmate antlers of the males; other members of the family have antlers with a "twig-like" configuration. Moose typically inhabit boreal and mixed deciduous forests of the Northern Hemisphere in temperate to subarctic climates.
Mountain goat
Order: Artiodactyla, Family: Bovidae
Occurrence: High peaks and meadows
The mountain goat (Oreamnos americanus), also known as the Rocky Mountain goat, is a large-hoofed mammal found only in North America. Despite its vernacular name, it is not a member of Capra, the genus of true goats. It resides at high elevations and is a sure-footed climber, often resting on rocky cliffs that predators cannot reach. It has been introduced.
Mountain lion
Order: Carnivora, Family: Felidae
Occurrence: Coniferous forests
The cougar (Puma concolor), also known as puma, mountain lion, mountain cat, catamount or panther, depending on the region, is a mammal of the family Felidae, native to the Americas. This large, solitary cat has the greatest range of any large wild terrestrial mammal in the Western Hemisphere, extending from Yukon in Canada to the southern Andes of South America. An adaptable, generalist species, the cougar is found in every major American habitat type. It is the second heaviest cat in the American continents after the jaguar. Although large, the cougar is most closely related to smaller felines.
Mule deer
Order: Artiodactyla, Family: Cervidae
Occurrence: Open forests, meadows, often at high elevations
The mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus) is a deer whose habitat is in the western half of North America. It gets its name from its large mule-like ears. Adult male mule deer are called bucks, adult females are called does, and young of both sexes are called fawns. The black-tailed deer is considered by some a distinct species though it is classified as a subspecies of the mule deer. Unlike its cousin, the white-tailed deer, mule deer are generally more associated with the land west of the Missouri River. The most noticeable differences between whitetails and mule deer are the color of their tails and configuration of their antlers. The mule deer's tail is black tipped.
Pronghorn
Order: Artiodactyla, Family: Antilocapridae
Occurrence: Basin-prairie and mountain-foothills, shrublands, eastern great plains and great basin-foothills grasslands, sagebrush-grasslands
The pronghorn (Antilocapra americana), is a species of artiodactyl mammal native to interior western and central North America. Though not a true antelope, it is often known colloquially in North America as the prong buck, pronghorn antelope or simply antelope, as it closely resembles the true antelopes of the Old World and fills a similar ecological niche due to convergent evolution. It is the only surviving member of the family Antilocapridae.
Red fox
Order: Carnivora, Family: Canidae
Occurrence: Grasslands, open forest
The red fox (Vulpes vulpes) is a small canid native to much of North America and Eurasia, as well as northern Africa. It is the most recognizable species of fox and in many areas it is referred to simply as "the fox". As its name suggests, its fur is predominantly reddish brown, but there is a naturally occurring gray morph known as the "silver" fox. The red fox is by far the most widespread and abundant species of fox, found in almost every single habitat in the Northern Hemisphere, from the coastal marshes of United States, to the alpine tundras of Tibetan Plateau.
Swift fox
Order: Carnivora, Family: Canidae
Occurrence: Short-grass prairies and deserts
The swift fox (Vulpes velox) is a small light orange-tan fox around the size of a domestic cat found in the western grasslands of North America, such as Colorado, New Mexico and Texas. It also lives in Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta in Canada, where it was previously extirpated. It is closely related to the kit fox and the two species are sometimes known as subspecies of Vulpes velox because hybrids of the two species occur naturally where their ranges overlap.
The swift fox lives primarily in short-grass prairies and deserts. Due to predator control programs in the 1930s, it was considered extinct in Canada for some time, but reintroduction programs have been successful in reintroducing the species. Due to stable populations elsewhere, the species is considered by the IUCN to be of least concern.
White-tailed deer
Order: Artiodactyla, Family: Cervidae
Occurrence: Coniferous forests, meadows, creek and river bottoms
The white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), also known as the Virginia deer, or simply as the whitetail, is a medium-sized deer native to the United States (all but five of the states), Canada, Mexico, Central America, and in South America as far south as Peru. The species is most common east of the Rocky Mountains, and is absent from much of the western United States, including Nevada, Utah, California, Hawaii, and Alaska (though its close relatives, the mule deer and black-tailed deer, can be found there). It does, however, survive in aspen parklands and deciduous river bottomlands within the central and northern Great Plains, and in mixed deciduous riparian corridors, river valley bottomlands, and lower foothills of the northern Rocky Mountain regions from Wyoming to southeastern British Columbia.
Small mammalsProcyonids
From the Atlas of Birds, Mammals, Amphibians, and Reptiles in Wyoming:
Order: Carnivora, Family: Procyonidae

Ringtail, Bassariscus astutus
Raccoon, Procyon lotor, open forests, stream bottoms
Badgers and weasels
From the Atlas of Birds, Mammals, Amphibians, and Reptiles in Wyoming:

Order: Carnivora, Family: Mustelidae

Wolverine, Gulo gulo, coniferous forests and alpine meadows
North American river otter, Lontra canadensis, rivers, lakes, ponds
Pacific marten, Martes caurina, coniferous forests
Black-footed ferret, Mustela nigripes
Least weasel, Mustela nivalis, open forests and grasslands
American ermine, Mustela richardsonii, coniferous forests and meadows
Long-tailed weasel, Neogale frenata, open forests and meadows
American mink, Neogale vison, creek and lake edges
Fisher, Pekania pennanti, coniferous forests
American badger, Taxidea taxus, grasslands
Skunks
From the Atlas of Birds, Mammals, Amphibians, and Reptiles in Wyoming:

Order: Carnivora, Family: Mephitidae

Striped skunk, Mephitis mephitis, open forests and grasslands
Western spotted skunk, Spilogale gracilis
Eastern spotted skunk, Spilogale putorius
Hares and rabbits
From the Atlas of Birds, Mammals, Amphibians, and Reptiles in Wyoming:

Order: Lagomorpha, Family: Leporidae

Pygmy rabbit, Brachylagus idahoensis
Snowshoe hare, Lepus americanus, coniferous forests
Black-tailed jackrabbit, Lepus californicus
White-tailed jackrabbit, Lepus townsendii, grasslands
Desert cottontail, Sylvilagus audubonii
Eastern cottontail, Sylvilagus floridanus
Mountain cottontail, Sylvilagus nuttallii, forests, brushy areas
Pikas
From the Atlas of Birds, Mammals, Amphibians, and Reptiles in Wyoming:
Order: Lagomorpha, Family: Ochotonidae

American pika, Ochotona princeps, rocky slopes
Shrews
From the Atlas of Birds, Mammals, Amphibians, and Reptiles in Wyoming:

Order: Eulipotyphla, Family: Soricidae

Masked shrew, Sorex cinereus, coniferous forests, meadows, ponds and stream edges
Hayden's shrew, Sorex haydeni
Pygmy shrew, Sorex hoyi, dry open coniferous forests
Merriam's shrew, Sorex merriami
Dusky shrew, Sorex monticolus, higher elevation coniferous forests
Dwarf shrew, Sorex nanus
American water shrew, Sorex palustris, stream edges
Preble's shrew, Sorex preblei
Vagrant shrew, Sorex vagrans, moist forests and grasslands, marsh and stream edges
Beaver
From the Atlas of Birds, Mammals, Amphibians, and Reptiles in Wyoming:
Order: Rodentia, Family: Castoridae

Beaver, Castor canadensis, ponds, streams, lakes
Squirrels
From the Atlas of Birds, Mammals, Amphibians, and Reptiles in Wyoming:

Order: Rodentia, Family: Sciuridae

White-tailed prairie dog, Cynomys leucurus
Black-tailed prairie dog, Cynomys ludovicianus
Northern flying squirrel, Glaucomys sabrinus, coniferous forests, nocturnal
Yellow-bellied marmot, Marmota flaviventris, open rocky foothills, talus slopes
Abert's squirrel, Sciurus aberti
Eastern fox squirrel, Sciurus niger
Uinta ground squirrel, Spermophilus armatus
Wyoming ground squirrel, Spermophilus elegans
Golden-mantled ground squirrel, Spermophilus lateralis, high open forests, rocky areas
Spotted ground squirrel, Spermophilus spilosoma
Thirteen-lined ground squirrel, Spermophilus tridecemlineatus, grasslands
Yellow-pine chipmunk, Tamias amoenus, open forests, brushy, rocky areas
Cliff chipmunk, Tamias dorsalis
Least chipmunk, Tamias minimus, high open forests, brushy, rocky areas, alpine meadows
Uinta chipmunk, Tamias umbrinus
American red squirrel, Tamiasciurus hudsonicus
Pocket mice and kangaroo rats
From the Atlas of Birds, Mammals, Amphibians, and Reptiles in Wyoming:
Order: Rodentia, Family: Heteromyidae

Plains pocket mouse, Perognathus flavescens
Great Basin pocket mouse, Perognathus parvus
Hispid pocket mouse, Chaetodipus hispidus
Olive-backed pocket mouse, Perognathus fasciatus
Ord's kangaroo rat, Dipodomys ordii
Silky pocket mouse, Perognathus flavus
Pocket gophers
From the Atlas of Birds, Mammals, Amphibians, and Reptiles in Wyoming:
Order: Rodentia, Family: Geomyidae

Northern pocket gopher, Thomomys talpoides, meadows
Idaho pocket gopher, Thomomys idahoensis
Wyoming pocket gopher, Thomomys clusius
Plains pocket gopher, Geomys bursarius
Mice
From the Atlas of Birds, Mammals, Amphibians, and Reptiles in Wyoming:

Order: Rodentia, Family: Cricetidae

Western deer mouse, Peromyscus sonoriensis, forests, grasslands, alpine meadows
Northern grasshopper mouse, Onychomys leucogaster
Western harvest mouse, Reithrodontomys megalotis
Plains harvest mouse, Reithrodontomys montanus
White-footed mouse, Peromyscus leucopus
Pinyon mouse, Peromyscus truei
Canyon mouse, Peromyscus crinitus
Jumping mice
From the Atlas of Birds, Mammals, Amphibians, and Reptiles in Wyoming:
Order: Rodentia, Family: Dipodidae

Western jumping mouse, Zapus princeps, grasslands, alpine meadows
Meadow jumping mouse, Zapus hudsonius
Muskrats, voles and woodrats
From the Atlas of Birds, Mammals, Amphibians, and Reptiles in Wyoming:

Order: Rodentia, Family: Cricetidae

Muskrat, Ondatra zibethicus, streams, lakes, marshy areas
Heather vole, Phenacomys intermedius, coniferous forests, alpine meadows
Long-tailed vole, Microtus longicaudus, coniferous forests, grasslands
Meadow vole, Microtus pennsylvanicus, open forests, meadows, along streams, marshy areas
Southern red-backed vole, Clethrionomys gapperi, coniferous forests
Water vole, Microtus richardsoni, high elevation stream and lake edges
Montane vole, Microtus montanus
Prairie vole, Microtus ochrogaster
Sagebrush vole, Lemmiscus curtatus
Bushy-tailed woodrat, Neotoma cinerea, rocky areas, old buildings
Porcupines
Order: Rodentia, Family: Erethizontidae

North American porcupine, Erethizon dorsatum, coniferous forests
Bats
From the Atlas of Birds, Mammals, Amphibians, and Reptiles in Wyoming:

Order: Chiroptera, Family: Vespertilionidae

Big brown bat, Eptesicus fuscus, coniferous forests, often around buildings, caves
Hoary bat, Lasiurus cinereus, coniferous forests, mostly nocturnal
Little brown bat, Myotis lucifugus, coniferous forests, often around buildings, caves, nocturnal
Long-eared myotis, Myotis evotis, coniferous forests, meadows, nocturnal
Long-legged bat, Myotis volans, coniferous forests, meadows, nocturnal
Silver-haired bat, Lasionycteris noctivagans, coniferous forests, meadows, nocturnal
California myotis, Myotis californicus
Eastern red bat, Lasiurus borealis
Fringed myotis, Myotis thysanodes
Northern myotis, Myotis septentrionalis
Pallid bat, Antrozous pallidus
Spotted bat, Euderma maculatum
Townsend's big-eared bat, Corynorhinus townsendii
Western small-footed myotis, Myotis ciliolabrum
Yuma myotis, Myotis yumanensis
Eastern pipistrelle, Pipistrellus subflavus
Brazilian free-tailed bat, Tadarida brasiliensis
Big free-tailed bat, Nyctinomops macrotis
Exotic species, not native to WyomingSmall mammals
Eastern gray squirrel, Sciurus carolinensis
Virginia opossum, Didelphis virginiana
House mouse, Mus musculus
Norway rat, Rattus norvegicus


In terrestrial animals, plantigrade locomotion means walking with the toes and metatarsals flat on the ground. It is one of three forms of locomotion adopted by terrestrial mammals. The other options are digitigrade, walking on the toes and fingers with the heel and wrist permanently raised, and unguligrade,  walking on the nail or nails of the toes (the hoof) with the heel/wrist and the digits permanently raised. The leg of a plantigrade mammal includes the bones of the upper leg (femur/humerus) and lower leg (tibia and fibula/radius and ulna). The leg of a digitigrade mammal also includes the metatarsals/metacarpals, the bones that in a human compose the arch of the foot and the palm of the hand. The leg of an unguligrade mammal also includes the phalanges, the finger and toe bones.

Among extinct animals, most early mammals such as pantodonts were plantigrade. A plantigrade foot is the primitive condition for mammals; digitigrade and unguligrade locomotion evolved later. Among archosaurs, the pterosaurs were partially plantigrade and walked on the whole of the hind foot and the fingers of the hand-wing. Out of the plantigrade animals, only a few, such as humans, kangaroos and certain rodents, are obligate bipeds, while most others are functional bipeds.
List of plantigrade animals
Plantigrade animals species include (but are not limited to):

Mammals
Several primates (including humans and lemurs)
Carnivora:
Ursidae: bears (with the exception of the hemicyonines)
amphicyonids
Musteloidea: skunks, raccoons, weasels, badgers, otters, and red pandas
Nimravids: false saber-tooth cats
Oxyaenids
Rodents: mice, rats, porcupines
Hedgehogs
Hyraxes
Marsupialia:  kangaroos, opossums
Nearly all basal mammals and non-mammalian synapsids were plantigrade
Birds
Loons, grebes, penguins, some auks, and most petrels (except for albatrosses and giant petrels)
Reptiles
Nearly all reptiles (including pterosaurs but excluding dinosaurs (including most birds), which are digitigrade or semi-digitigrade) are plantigrade
Amphibians
All amphibians are plantigrade
Evolution
The primary advantages of a plantigrade foot are stability and weight-bearing ability; plantigrade feet have the largest surface area. The primary disadvantage of a plantigrade foot is speed. With more bones and joints in the foot, the leg is both shorter and heavier at the far end, which makes it difficult to move rapidly.
In humans and other great apes, another possible advantage of a plantigrade foot is that it may enhance fighting performance by providing a more powerful stance for striking and grappling.
Plantigrade foot occurs normally in humans in static postures of standing and sitting. It should also occur normally in gait (walking). Hypertonicity, spasticity, clonus, limited range of motion, abnormal flexion neural pattern, and a plantar flexor (calf) muscle contracture, as well as some forms of footwear such as high heeled shoes may contribute to an individual only standing and/or walking on their toes. It would be evident by the observable heel rise.


Pterodon (Ancient Greek: πτερόν (wing) + ὀδούς (tooth) meaning "wing tooth") is an extinct genus of hyaenodont in the family Hyainailouridae, containing two species. The type species Pterodon dasyuroides is known exclusively from the late Eocene to the earliest Oligocene of western Europe. The genus was first erected by the French zoologist Henri Marie Ducrotay de Blainville in 1839, who said that Georges Cuvier presented one of its fossils to a conference in 1828 but died before he could make a formal description of it. It was the second hyaenodont genus with taxonomic validity after Hyaenodon, but this resulted in taxonomic confusion over the validities of the two genera by other taxonomists. Although the taxonomic status of Pterodon was revised during the late 19th and early 20th centuries, it became a wastebasket taxon for other hyaenodont species found in Africa and Asia. Today, only the type species is recognized as belonging to the genus while just one is pending reassessment to another genus.
P. dasyuroides had cranial and dental characteristics typical of the Hyainailouridae such as an elongated, narrow, and proportionally large skull which measures ~26 cm (10 in) in length and dentition for hypercarnivorous diets and bone-crushing similar to modern hyenas. Due to the scarcely known postcranial materials of the species, its overall anatomy is unknown, although it likely weighed 51.56 kg (113.7 lb) and may have been similar to another Eocene-aged European hyainailourine Kerberos.
The hyainailourine made its appearance in western Europe back when it was a semi-isolated archipelago, likely originating from a ghost lineage from Afro-Arabia. It was one of the larger-sized carnivores of the continent, a typical trait of hyainailourines. It coexisted largely with faunas that were adapted to tropical to subtropical environments and grew strong levels of endemism, becoming a regular component based on fossil evidence from multiple localities. Pterodon went extinct by the Grande Coupure extinction and faunal turnover event in the earliest Oligocene of Europe, which was caused by shifts towards seasonality plus glaciation as well as closing seaway barriers that allowed for large faunal dispersals from Asia. Its extinction causes are uncertain but may have been the result of rapid habitat turnover, competition with immigrant faunas, or some combination of the two. However, competition has been questioned as experts found no evidence of carnivorans competitively replacing hyaenodonts in Europe.
TaxonomyResearch historyEarly history
In 1838, French zoologist Henri Marie Ducrotay de Blainville made a review of palaeontological history and taxonomy as built upon from previous decades. Blainville recognized the importance of dentition in determining the affinities of fossil animals but criticized the overreliance of dental systems as automatically indicating taxonomic affinities. He then went on to examine reported fossil "didelphids" (the taxonomic group now known as "marsupials") in European land. He conducted reviews of fossils as previously described by Laizer and Parieu, concluding that Hyaenodon is a valid genus based on its dentition but rejected the idea of it being a didelph based on its dental system and its molars being closer in affinity to modern carnivorans.
Blainville also mentioned a fossil of an upper jaw that the late Georges Cuvier found and previously thought was close in affinity to the Tasmanian devil (Sarcophilus harrisii) of New Holland (Australia). Previously, Cuvier presented the fossil to the French Academy of Sciences in 1828 and thought that it was a large species of thylacine (Thylacinus cynocephalus) but died before he could make a formal description of it. Of note is that although the article of Hyaenodon by Blainville was first written and published in 1838, it was not until a year later in 1839 when it was republished that Blainville added a footnote to the paragraph about the upper jaw. In it, he said that he restudied that fossil from the Paris Basin and again was certain that it was a "monodelphian" (today placental) predator, which he named Pterodon dasyuroides. The genus name means "wing tooth" and is a combination of the Ancient Greek words "pterón" (wing) and "odoús" (tooth). The etymology of the type species name derives from the Australian marsupial genus Dasyurus and the Greek suffix "-oides" meaning "like" due to apparent initial confusion of the genus affinity by Blainville.
In 1841-1842, Blainville mentioned the genus Pterodon but replaced the previous species name with P. parisiensis. He also stated that despite thinking that the mammal did not have close affinities with Dasyurus, he did not have sufficient skull material to prove what mammal group it was closest to. The species name is in reference to Paris where its first fossil was found.
Taxonomic disputes
The taxonomic positions of Pterodon and Hyaenodon for much of the 19th century were disputed by many palaeontologists. In 1846, Auguste Pomel argued that he was unsure if Pterodon belonged to the didelph clade based on its dentition being apparently similar to thylacines but having different skull structures from them and other marsupials. However, he rejected the position that Pterodon was more closely related to the monodelphs due to thinking that the skull did not closely resemble its members. Additionally, he said that it, Taxotherium, and Hyaenodon are functionally the same genus if not the same species, therefore stating that the latter two genera are synonymous with Pterodon. Pomel defined four species for the genus Pterodon: P. parisiensis, P. cuvieri (erected previously for Taxotherium as T. parisiense by Blainville), P. leptorhynchus (erected for Hyaenodon by Lazier and Parieu), and P. brachyrhynchus (previously named for Hyaenodon by Blainville).
In 1846, Paul Gervais recognized the species P. requieni, having named the species in honor of French naturalist Esprit Requien, the founder and director of the Musee d' Avignon (now the Musée Requien) who allowed him and Marcel de Serres to study local fossil mammal specimens. In 1848-1852, however, he reclassified the species as Hyaenodon requieni (having recognized the validity of the genus) and listed P. dasyuroides as the only species of Pterodon.
In 1853, Pomel changed his position by recognizing the validity of Hyaenodon, restoring the taxonomic affinities of species previously classified as belonging to it and therefore establishing that they no are no longer classified under Pterodon (H. leptorhynchus and H. brachyrhynchus). He also reclassified Taxotherium as a junior synonym of Hyaenodon instead of Pterodon. Within the genus Pterodon, he recognized the species name P. dasyuroides instead of P. parisiensis and created two additional species based on dentition shapes and sizes: P. cuvieri and P. coquandi.
European hyaenodont revisions
Gervais erected the species P. exiguum in 1873 based on dentition with some similarities to both Pterodon and Hyaenodon but noted that it may constitute a new genus once he has more fossil material. The palaeontologist then corrected himself in 1876 by stating that the species belongs to Hyaenodon as H. exiguum, not Pterodon.
In 1876, Filhol recognized only P. dasyuroides among all species previously erected for the genus and named a new species P. biincisivus from the phosphorite deposits of Escamps, France. He, in addition to confirming the taxonomic validities of the two species, erected a third named P. quercyi in 1882. The French naturalist named a new species Oxyaena galliæ based on dental remains being apparently similar to that of species of Oxyaena previously described by Edward Drinker Cope in the Eocene deposits of New Mexico, United States. in The same year, Filhol also reported that an individual whose last name was Pradines recently discovered anterior portions of the skull of P. dasyuroides from the phosphate deposits of Limogne-en-Quercy.
English naturalist Richard Lydekker made a review of known pan-carnivoran genera in 1884, classifying them within the order Carnivora and rejecting Cope's classification of the members into the suborder Creodonta within the order Bunotheria. While Cope originally assigned Hyaenodon as the sole member of Hyaenodontidae and Pterodon plus Oxyaena into Oxyaenidae, Lydekker felt that Pterodon was close in affinity to Hyaenodon and therefore belonged in Hyaenodontidae. For H. brachyhynchus, he listed P. brachyhynchus, P. requieni, and H. requieni as junior synonyms. He also listed P. leptorhynchus as a junior synonym of H. leptorhynchus as well as H. exiguus and P. exiguus as synonyms of H. vulpinus. For Pterodon, he recognized P. dasyuroides as the main valid species of the genus and listed P. parisiensis as a definite synonym as well as P. cuvieri and P. coquandi as possible synonyms, although he did not invalidate P. biincisivus. He also listed the species Oxyæna galliæ but thought that the genus could be merged into Pterodon due to minor dental differences and similarities to P. biincisivus.
Swiss palaeontologist Ludwig Rütimeyer erected another species named P. magnus in 1891 based on the larger dentition sizes compared to typical species of Pterodon. However, in 1906, German scientist Rudolf Martin said that he wanted to synonymize P. magnum and the questionable P. quercyi with P. dasyuroides. He also listed P. biincisivus as a synonym of P. dasyuroides and stated that only one species is valid within Pterodon. Additionally, he revalidated the species O. galliæ but created the genus Paroxyaena for it, arguing that because oxyaenids are very weakly represented in Europe compared to North America and that therefore the species' similarities to oxyaenids may have an instance of convergent evolution.
In 1979, Brigitte Lange-Badré made a systematic review of known hyaenodonts from Europe including Pterodon. She listed P. parisiensis,  P. cuvieri, P. coquandi, P. biincisivus, and P. quercyi as synonyms of the only European species P. dasyuroides. In addition, she listed P. magnum as a synonym of Paroxyaena galliae and listed Hyaenodon exiguus as taking taxonomic priority over H. vulpinus, therefore making the latter name and P. exiguum synonyms.
Wastebasket history
For much of its history, Pterodon was a wastebasket taxon for middle to late Paleogene and Miocene hyainailourines that lacked unique or advanced dental traits that Hyaenodon had. Many of the species classified or formerly classified to Pterodon were of African or Asian origins. Within the 20th century, the species formerly classified to the genus Pterodon were Apterodon macrognathus, Akhnatenavus leptognathus, "Hyainailouros" bugtiensis, Orienspterodon dahkoensis, and Neoparapterodon rechetovi. Several species names previously assigned to Pterodon were later considered to be synonyms of Hyaenodon species, namely "P. exploratus" (= H. incertus), "P. californicus" (= H. vetus), and "P. mongoliensis" (= H. mongoliensis). Also, both "Pterodon nyanzae" and "Hyainailouros nyanzae" were synonymized with Hyainailouros napakensis. Additionally, Hemipsalodon was made a synonym of Pterodon by Robert Joseph Gay Savage in 1965 while Metapterodon was synonymized with it by Leigh M. Van Valen in 1967, but the synonymies were unsupported by later authors.
In 2025, the three African species previously assigned to Pterodon, P. africanus; P. phiomensis; and P. syrtos; were reassigned to newer genera. Shorouq F. Al-Ashqar et al. erected Sekhmetops for the former two species and Bastetodon for the latter. As a result of the synonymies, only one species assigned to Pterodon remains pending reassessment to another genus: P. hyaenoides, which is classified as belonging to the Hyaenodontinae and is located in Asia.
In 1999, A.V. Lavrov mentioned in his dissertation paper a genus he erected named "Epipterodon" for which "Pterodon" hyaenoides would have been reclassified to. However, as the genus name has not yet been referenced and taxonomically validated in any peer-reviewed source, its name currently remains invalid.
Classification
Pterodon has historically been classified undisputedly as at least being within the clade of hyaenodonts within the later 20th century, later being included within the subfamily Hyainailourinae. However, it was since 2015 that Floréal Solé et al. proposed the clade Hyainailouridae, uniting the Hyainailourinae and Apterodontinae under the family and therefore making it taxonomically differentiated from the Hyaenodontidae. They also suggested usage of the hyainailourine tribes Hyainailourini (where Pterodon was classified) and Paroxyaenini, although the tribe name usages for hyaenodonts remain uncommon in academic literature. In 2016, Matthew Borths et al. suggested that the Hyainailouridae had a close relationship with the Teratodontinae and therefore arranged the superfamily Hyainailouroidea to include them and include the Proviverrinae, Hyaenodontidae, and North American hyaenodont groups. The family Hyainailouridae has since become more accepted in academic literature, although there are alternate clade rank methods for hyainailourines.
The order Hyaenodonta (replacing the now-invalidated clade Creodonta) is known first from the middle Paleocene of Afro-Africa, expanding to both Europe and Asia from Afro-Arabia in multiple "out-of-Africa" dispersal events. Although the true origins of the Hyainailouroidea is somewhat ambiguous, the Bayesian topologies support evidence that the Hyainailourinae, Apterodontinae, and Teratodontinae all had Afro-Arabian origins. Hyaenodonts made their first appearances in Europe in terms of the Mammal Paleogene zones by MP7 (or early Eocene), mostly predominantly the Proviverrinae. In terms of carnivorous mammal assemblages of Europe, MP8-MP10 marked the extinctions of the Viverravidae, Oxyaenidae, Sinopinae, and Mesonychidae. As a result, the endemic hyaenodonts and carnivoraforms remained the two only carnivorous mammal groups for much of the Eocene of Europe. Hyaenodonts were more diverse than carnivoraforms for much of the Eocene and increased in diversity with the appearances of the hyainailourines in MP16 and hyaenodontines in MP17A. The former group likely dispersed from Africa while the latter may have dispersed from Asia. Compared to the proviverrines which never exceeded 20 kg (44 lb), the hyainailourines were much larger in size.
Pterodon as defined sensu lato (in a loose sense) is polyphyletic when including species other than P. dasyuroides. This is because P. dasyuroides does not form a natural clade with non-European species classified within the genus, therefore meaning that they are pending reassessments to other genera. Pterodon sensu stricto (in a strict sense) made its appearance in western Europe by MP18 (late Eocene) in the form of P. dasyuroides and lasted up to MP20. P. dasyuroides was likely part of a ghost lineage of dispersing hyainailourines from Africa, and Kerberos did not appear to have descended into Pterodon or Parapterodon.
The phylogenetic tree for the superfamily Hyainailouroidea within the order Hyaenodonta as created by Floréal Solé et al. in 2021 is outlined below:
DescriptionSkull
The order Hyaenodonta is diagnosed as having an elongated and narrow skull with a narrow cranial base (basicranium), a high and narrow occipital bone, and a transversely constricted interorbital region. Within the order, members of the Hyainailouridae share traits including a proportionally massive skull with an absence of any suture between the parietal bone and frontal bone, and a weak postorbital process (or projection), an extended pterygoid bone in its underside and side areas, the presence of a preglenoid crest, and side expansions of the squamosal relative to the back position of the zygomatic arch.
The skull of P. dasyuroides (specimen Qu8301, National Museum of Natural History, France) was described by Lange-Badré in 1979 as retaining proportions similar to members of the Proviverrinae, its maximum height barely reaching a third of its maximum length because of a lack of elevation of the cranial vault. The muzzle is narrow and cylindrical in shape, barely projecting at the level of the roots of the canines. The cranium is equally as narrow, is shaped like an hourglass, and is shorter than the facial skeleton. The known skull measures 26 cm (10 in) in length, and it is similar to that of Kerberos in being elongated and having a long rostrum and neurocranium. It is one of the two only known Eocene hyainailourine genera to be known by skull material, the other being Kerberos.
In the upper view of the skull, the nasals are convex dorsally (top area in the case of the skull) and extend far into the back beyond the front edge of the orbit. A short tubercle emerges from the nasals into the lacrimal bone, and then the nasals come into contact with the frontal bone by a W-shaped suture. The frontal eminences of the frontal bone, or the rounded elevations of the front of the upper skull, are not very prominent based on the weak depressions that are widely open. The skull lacks any postorbital process projections within its front area. The blunt brow ridges arise back from the upper edge of the orbits as triangular-shaped roughnesses and arrive at the sagittal plane area in front of the post-orbital constriction. The coronal suture is destroyed in known specimens and therefore has an unknown position relative to the post-orbital constriction. The cranial vault is formed by the two parietal bones, and is gradually detached from the high and thin sagittal crest, which meets with the supraoccipital crest and forms a small triangular facet. The maximum width of the cranium barely exceeds that of the frontal bones at the upper edges of the orbits.
In a lateral (or side) view, the premaxillae are short and extend a small distance between the nasals and maxillae, slightly preceding the canines. Their thick upper front edges form a roughly heart-shaped and subvertical nasal opening with a maximum width at the level of the nasal premaxillary suture. There is a slight projection of the root of the canine on the upper maxilla which is followed by an elongated depression that precedes that the long, narrow opening of the infraorbital canal. The lacrimal bone extends widely onto the face in a large semicircle shape which restricts frontal-maxillary contact. There is no lacrimal tubercle present in the skull. The squamosal suture is low in position, not very convex, and is very inclined towards the zygomatic arches, explaining the triangular cross section of the skull. The squamosal roots of the zygomatic arches are found in a completely marginal position and, unlike modern carnivorans, are not under the temporal wall of the skull but outside it. The mastoid part of the temporal bone is between the retrotympanic part of the squamosal and the paroccipital process of the exoccipital region. While the zygomatic arches were not completely preserved in P. dasyuroides, those of the related Apterodon macrognathus and Kerberos langebadreae are dorsoventrally deep for robustness to support masseter muscles.
The face of the occipital bone is narrow and has a fan-like shape due to the strong narrowing at the level of the supraoccipital-squamosal suture followed by a strongly concave squamous part of the occipital bone. Due to this development, it differs strongly from that of Hyaenodon but is comparable to that of Apterodon.
Typical of mammals with elongated snouts, the lower edge of the mandible (specimen Qu8636, National Museum of Natural History, France) is slightly curved. After the receding mandibular symphysis region, the mandible is rectilinear without any change in shape in the preangular region. The angle of the mandible is short and stocky for which the medial pterygoid muscle would have connected to.
Endocast anatomy
P. dasyuroides is known by a brain endocast, which was first described by Jean Piveteau in 1935. The natural endocast is stored at the National Museum of Natural History, France with no catalogue number. It is estimated to have an endocast volume of 60 cc (3.7 cu in). Only limited morphologies can be observed as that of the surface was not well-preserved. The endocast shape reflects well the general appearance of the rectilinear sagittal profile of the skull. There is an absence of any form of occipital tilt, and the brain endocast is made up of the olfactory bulbs, the cerebrum, and the cerebellum. The back view of an artificial endocast as studied by Lange-Badré reveals that it has a triangular to ovate shape, with its olfactory bulbs as its top part and the cerebellar hemispheres. The maximum height of the brain cast is at the level of the cerebellum. Overall, the molding appears low in position, the cerebellum taking up a large volume of it compared to the cerebrum.
The olfactory lobes, the structures involved in the sense of smell, are not covered by the cerebral hemispheres and diverge from each other somewhat. It is detached from the structures of the olfactory nerve which crossed into the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone. The olfactory peduncles attach the olfactory bulbs to the non-prominent olfactory tubercles. Within the rhinencephalon, the piriform cortex is the most voluminous section, appearing folded under the neocortex and having a compact shape.
The neocortex of P. dasyuroides is more developed compared to the earlier hyaenodontid Cynohyaenodon cayluxi because of the lower positions of the rhinals and the larger number of sulci (or furrows). The cerebral hemispheres are separated from the cerebellum by a large gap and, in the front area of the brain, do not cover the olfactory bulbs. The neocortex is unremarkable and only in front of the piriform lobe. P. dasyuroides may have had five neopallium fissures, including a lateral sulcus, a suprasylvia preceded by a coronal or Y-shaped furrow, and a possible postsylvia. P. dasyuroides was previously thought to have had a primitive, simple, two-furrowed neocortex, which Lange-Badré concluded was incorrect because of the significant development of the neocortex itself and the lower position of the rhinals compared to Cynohyaenodon.
Therese Flink et al. in 2021 discussed how palaeontologists interpreted the endocast of P. dasyuroides, stating while Piveteau in 1935 and Lange-Badré in 1979 thought that the midbrain was exposed, Leonard Radinsky in 1977 suggested that instead, the neocortex's edge reached the cerebellum and olfactory bulbs. After a reexamination of the natural endocast, Flink et al. were inclined to agree with the latter view and stated that if there truly was any midbrain exposure, it would not have been well-pronounced in comparison to the other hyaenodonts Thinocyon velox or Proviverra typica.
The cerebellum is bulky compared to the front portion of the cerebrum because the former's cavity is not as large as the cerebral fossa and lack of coverage by the neocortex. The cerebellum appears higher in position than the cerebrum, and the cerebellar vermis strongly projects between the cerebellum's two hemispheres. The primary fissure of the cerebellum, located  on the paleocerebellum-neocerebellum boundary, is in a backwards position, more so than certain "condylarths" such as Arctocyon and Pleuraspidotherium. There is no other known transverse furrow on the cerebellar vermis.
Dentition
The subfamily Hyainailourinae within the family Hyainailouridae is diagnosed in the upper dentition as having high and secant-shaped paraconid cusps and cone-shaped metacone and paracone cusps on the M1-M2 molars, a weak to absent P3 lingual cingulum, and a lack of any continuous lingual cingulum on P4. For lower dentition, the M3 talonid cusp is reduced compared to those on M1-M2, and the protoconid and paraconid cusps are roughly equal in length in the molars.
Pterodon sensu lato is diagnosed in its dental differences with other hyainailourid genera. It differs from Metapterodon in being larger, the presence of an M3 talonid cusp, larger M1-M2 tanolid cusps, narrower upper molars with shorter metastyle ridges, and an incomplete paracone-metacone cusp fusion. It differs also from Akhnatenavus in the talonid cusps of the molars being as wide as its trigonid cusps, roughly equal sizes of the protoconid and paraconid cusp sizes in the molars, unreduced premolar sizes, and a lack of diastemata for premolar spaces. Pterodon differs from Hyainailouros and Megistotherium by its smaller size and larger talonids on its lower molars. The diagnosis reflects the inclusion of other species included in Pterodon outside of the type species. P. dasyuroides differs from Kerberos by smaller-sized P1 and P1 premolars, a reduced number of upper incisors, a smaller protocone cusp on P3, and smaller size. P. dasyuroides is also described as having a dental formula of 2.1.4.31.1.3–4.3. There is no evidence of any sexual dimorphism based on dentition.

In the upper dentition, the two incisors, conical in shape, are unequal in size, the central incisor being twice or thrice as large as the lateral incisor. Their shapes suggest that they play a role in piercing through food rather than cutting them. The upper canines, although much larger than other teeth of the upper dental row, are not as strong as those of extant hyenas, as they are less robust in relation to the skull. P1 is small-sized, lacks any cingulate prominence except the anterior-lingual region where it connects with a ridge from the top of a cusp, and is formed by a conical cusp with a back half that is stretched into a lower edge. P2 is similar to P1 in shape; its hook shape in its main cusp is prominent, and the cingulum runs from the ridges over the entire lingual surface. P3 differs from the two other premolars by the top of the main cusp occupying a median position. The P4 has a lingual expansion of the median area of the paraconid cusp but is difficult to distinguish by itself from the P4 of Hyaenodon requieni. The first two upper molars have compressed and stretched metastyle ridges for a bladelike appearance that makes carnivorous diets unambiguous. The shapes of the two molars are of a right triangle with a front (anterior) base, and the first is smaller and more conservative in cuspid development than the second. M3 is wider than it is long and comes in two variants: it is either as wide as the two molars that precede it or is narrower than the two other molars and is stockier than the other variant.
In terms of the lower dentition, there are 8-9 teeth, meaning a reduction in dentition compared to primitive placental mammals. The known individual specimens from Quercy only show one pair of lower incisors, which are rarely preserved and are thick with flat wear. Similar to the upper canines, the lower canines are long, slender, and not very curved. The P1 is most often absent in development, although one specimen reveals one on the left side but not right of a mandible while another has them on both sides. It is a conical, short, and thick tooth with no distal stretching and two roots fused into one. P2-P3 have low and stubby crowns while P4 is high and long, its height being 1.5 to 2 times that of P3. The M1, rarely adequately preserved, is subject to early and severe wear that levels the trigonid and talonid cusps, likely caused by frequent maximum-force occlusion with P4. The M2 and M3, despite the disappearance of the metaconid cusp and the receded talonid cusp, are thick and not very sharp. The protoconid cusp is slender and is the dominant cusp within the last two molars. M3 differs from M2 by being larger in size and the smaller, triangular-shaped talonid cusp.
Postcranial remains
P. dasyuroides is known by very few postcranial remains, which themselves currently have no known whereabouts. Blainville illustrated postcranial remains designated to "Taxotherium parisiense" in 1841, but only the ulna and fibula were referenced as belonging to P. dasyuroides by later palaeontologists like Léonard Ginsburg in 1980, leaving the taxonomic statuses of the humerus, carpals + metacarpals, astragalus, and calcaneus ambiguous, especially since Taxotherium was synonymized with Hyaenodon.
According to Ginsburg, the ulna of Hyainailouros sulzeri is arched and has a high plus well-developed olecranon (bony prominence on the elbow) and a long and strong diaphysis up to the distal end of the bone. The olecranon of H. sulzeri is long compared to those of carnivorans and it in a back position similar to artiodactyls. The antero-external tubercle is diminished while the antero-internal tubercle well-developed, a trait Ginsburg said was also found to be similar to a sketched ulna of P. dasyuroides by Blainville in 1841. The fibula of H. sulzeri was described as being thicker in comparison to carnivorans, with the diaphysis being twice as antero-posteriorly elongated in its distal area as its proximal area. The fibula's astragalus surface being wide and long is similar to that of P. dasyuroides as also depicted by Blainville.
Size
In 1977, Radinsky made early size estimates for hyaenodonts with known skeletons and no known complete which he based size estimates off of other "creodonts." He estimated that P. dasyuroides had an estimated body length range of 104 cm (41 in)-117 cm (46 in) and an estimated body weight range of 25.68 kg (56.6 lb)-35.149 kg (77.49 lb). However, due to the proportions of hyaenodonts being different from extant carnivorans, estimated values of them may not reflect their actual sizes.
Estimating the body sizes of hyaenodonts has proven difficult because they are extinct and have no modern analogues, plus dentally or cranially derived body sizes based on extant carnivorans are problematic since they have large crania in comparison to carnivorans, which produce unreasonably large estimated size values. As a result, hyaenodonts are measured more based on body mass and not estimated body size.
In 2015, Solé et al. estimated that based on the length of M1-M3 being 52.35 mm (2.061 in), it may have weighed 51.56 kg (113.7 lb). Hyainailourids have been known for growing to typically larger sizes compared to other hyaenodonts, including the Paleogene and especially the Miocene. The estimated weight values for P. dasyuroides and other studied hyaenodonts remained unchanged in a 2020 paper by Solé et al.
Palaeobiology
The order Hyaenodonta occupied a wide range of body sizes/body masses and ranged from mesocarnivorous to hypercarnivorous diets. The Hyainailourinae, which includes P. dasyuroides, was one hyaenodont lineage that gained hypercarnivorous adaptations given its various specific dental configurations. The diets of pan-carnivorans like P. dasyuroides were also inferred from Hunter-Schreger bands (HSB) on the tooth enamels of placental mammals. P. dasyuroides and some other hyaenodonts have only zigzag HSB patterns, patterns observed in extant carnivorans with high bite forces due to adaptations for bone-crushing since the zigzag HSBs render the enamel resistant to tensile stress. Because of its overall dentition morphology, P. dasyuroides is thought to have had adaptations to both meat cutting and bone crushing, the latter trait being shared with other later hyaenodonts.
Due to an overall lack of postcranial remains known for P. dasyuroides in the modern day, the locomotion of the Paleogene hyainailourid is unknown. In comparison, adequate postcranial remains are known for Hyainailouros sulzeri, Kerberos langebadreae, and Simbakubwa kutokaafrika, allowing for determinations of the locomotion methods of the hyainailourids. The elbow of H. sulzeri reveals incapability of flexible pronation-supination movements compared to typical cursorial mammals. The angulations and lengths of the fingers in relation to the metapodial bones, and the relation of the radius to the ulna suggest digitigrade movements of the forelimbs. The hindlimbs indicate similar results of digitigrade movement but, according to Ginsburg, have remnant traits of ancestral plantigrade movement. He theorized that it may have been semi-digitigrade overall with capabilities of leaping and occasional plantigrade movement. Similar traits of semi-digitigrady were also observed in S. kutokaafrika, with no capability of full digitigrade movement. Such adaptations of Miocene hyainailourines were likely the result of responses to more open environments.
In comparison, however, the Paleogene hyainailourid Kerberos shows plantigrade stances and terrestrial locomotion based on known postcranial evidence. The locomotion method made it differ from the more cursorial hyaenodontid Hyaenodon as well as hyaenids and borophagine canids, which all also displayed degrees of ossiphageous (bone-crushing) adaptations. The locomotion method of Kerberos suggests that plantigrady was a primitive trait of the order Hyaenodonta, including the hyainailourids, while digitigrady/semi-digitigrady adaptations were derived traits within the order. Kerberos is thought to have been an active predator and opportunistic scavenger based on its fossil evidence.
PalaeoecologyEarly pre–Grande Coupure Europe
For much of the Eocene, the world's environments were shaped by warm and humid climates, with subtropical to tropical closed forests being the dominant habitats. Multiple carnivorous mammal groups arose in Europe, Asia, Afro-Arabia, and North America, namely mesonychians, hyaenodonts, oxyaenids, and carnivoramorphs, dispersing between the continents. Several other prominent mammal orders arose within the continents by the early Eocene including the Perissodactyla, Artiodactyla, and Primates, diversifying rapidly and developing dentitions specialized for folivory. The omnivorous forms mostly either switched to folivorous diets or went extinct by the middle Eocene (47 to 37 Ma) along with the archaic "condylarths".
Land-based connections to the north of the developing Atlantic Ocean were interrupted around 53 Ma, meaning that North America and Greenland were no longer well-connected to western Europe. From the early Eocene up until the Grande Coupure extinction event (56 Ma to 33.9 Ma), the western Eurasian continent was separated into three landmasses, the former two of which were isolated by seaways: western Europe (an archipelago), Balkanatolia, and eastern Eurasia (Balkanatolia was in between the Paratethys Sea of the north and the Neotethys Ocean of the south). The Holarctic mammalian faunas of western Europe were therefore mostly isolated from other continents including Greenland, Africa, and eastern Eurasia, allowing for endemism to occur within western Europe. The European mammals of the late Eocene (MP17 to MP20) were mostly descendants of endemic middle Eocene groups as a result.
By MP16, a faunal turnover event occurred that marked the extinctions of lophiodonts, European tapiroids, and all crocodylomorphs except for the alligatoroid Diplocynodon. The causes of the faunal turnover have been attributed to a shift from humid and highly tropical environments to drier and more temperate forests with open areas and more abrasive vegetation. The surviving herbivorous faunas shifted their dentitions and dietary strategies accordingly to adapt to abrasive and seasonal vegetation. The environments were still subhumid and full of subtropical evergreen forests, however. The Palaeotheriidae was the sole remaining European perissodactyl group, and frugivorous-folivorous or purely folivorous artiodactyls became the dominant group in western Europe.
During and after the faunal turnover event in western Europe, the Hyainailourinae made its first appearance in the continent by MP16 while the Hyaenodontinae appeared by MP17a and the carnivoran family Amphicyonidae by MP18. Hyaenodonts remained the dominant carnivorous mammal group compared to the carnivoraforms. In the environments, the body masses of hyaenodonts tended to increase over time, although the rate was slower to those in North America, meaning that they were still favorable enough they were able to achieve large sizes. The large sizes of hyaenodonts had only been previously reached in western Europe by mesonychids in the early Eocene. In comparison, the presences of large flightless birds and crocodyloforms in the early-middle Eocene did not appear to have influenced hyaenodont body size.
Late Eocene
P. dasyuroides first appears in the western European fossil record by MP18, with a significant ghost lineage of probably Afro-Arabian origins that makes its exact evolutionary history unknown. It has no known appearance in eastern Europe. The range of P. dasyuroides from MP18 to MP20 likely overlapped with other hyaenodonts (Hyaenodontinae, Hyainailourinae, and Proviverrinae) such as Hyaenodon, Cynohyaenodon, Allopterodon, Parapterodon, Paenoxyaenoides, and Quercytherium. Several carnivoraforms likely overlapped with its range as well, such as miacids (Paramiacis, Quercygale, Simamphicyon), and the amphicyonid Cynodictis (several species are assigned to the genus that are pending reassessment, however).
P. dasyuroides coexisted with a wide diversity of mammals, including endemic artiodactyls (Anoplotheriidae, Xiphodontidae, Choeropotamidae (recently determined to be polyphyletic, however), Cebochoeridae, Amphimerycidae, Mixtotheriidae, and Cainotheriidae), non-endemic artiodactyls (Dichobunidae, Tapirulidae, and Anthracotheriidae), perissodactyls (Palaeotheriidae), leptictidans (Pseudorhyncocyonidae), primates (Adapoidea and Omomyoidea), eulipotyphlans (Nyctitheriidae), chiropterans, herpetotheriid marsupials, and endemic rodents (Pseudosciuridae, Theridomyidae, and Gliridae). The alligatoroid Diplocynodon, present only in Europe since the upper Paleocene, coexisted with pre-Grande Coupure faunas as well, likely consuming insects, fish, frogs, and eggs due to prey partitioning previously with other crocodylomorphs that had since died out by the late Eocene. In addition to snakes, frogs, and salamandrids, rich assemblage of lizards are known in western Europe as well from MP16-MP20, representing the Iguanidae, Lacertidae, Gekkonidae, Agamidae, Scincidae, Helodermatidae, and Varanoidea, most of which were able to thrive in the warm temperatures of western Europe.
The MP19 locality of Escamps, for instance, indicates that P. dasyuroides coexisted with the herpetotheriids Peratherium and Amphiperatherium, pseudorhyncocyonid Pseudorhyncocyon, bats (Hipposideros, Vaylatsia, Vespertiliavus, Stehlinia), primates (Microchoerus, Palaeolemur), rodents (Blainvillimys, Theridomys, Plesiarctomys, Glamys), hyaenodont Hyaenodon, amphicyonid Cynodictis, palaeotheres Palaeotherium and Plagiolophus, dichobunid Dichobune, anoplotheriids Anoplotherium and Diplobune, cainothere Paroxacron and Oxacron, xiphodonts (Xiphodon, Dichodon, Haplomeryx), and amphimerycid Amphimeryx.
Extinction
The Grande Coupure extinction and faunal turnover event of western Europe, dating back to the earliest Oligocene (MP20-MP21), is one of the largest and most abrupt faunal events in the Cenozoic record, which is coincident with climate forcing events of cooler and more seasonal climates. The result of the event was a 60% extinction rate of western European mammalian lineages while Asian faunal immigrants replaced them. The Grande Coupure is often marked by palaeontologists as part of the Eocene-Oligocene boundary as a result at 33.9 Ma, although some estimate that the event began 33.6-33.4 Ma. The event correlates directly with or after the Eocene-Oligocene transition, an abrupt shift from a greenhouse world characterizing much of the Paleogene to a coolhouse/icehouse world of the early Oligocene onwards. The massive drop in temperatures stems from the first major expansion of the Antarctic ice sheets that caused drastic pCO2 decreases and an estimated drop of ~70 m (230 ft) in sea level.
The seaway dynamics separating western Europe from other landmasses to strong extents but allowing for some levels of dispersals prior to the Grande Coupure are complicated and contentious, but many palaeontologists agreed that glaciation and the resulting drops in sea level played major roles in the drying of the seaways previously acting as major barriers to eastern migrants from Balkanatolia and western Europe. The Turgai Strait is often proposed as the main European seaway barrier prior to the Grande Coupure, but some researchers challenged this perception recently, arguing that it completely receded already 37 Ma, long before the Eocene-Oligocene transition. Alexis Licht et al suggested that the Grande Coupure could have possibly been synchronous with the Oi-1 glaciation (33.5 Ma), which records a decline in atmospheric CO2, boosting the Antarctic glaciation that already started by the Eocene-Oligocene transition. The Oi-1 glaciation, similar to the first glaciation event, caused large drops in sea level and pushed the global climate towards a coolhouse/icehouse environment.
The Grande Coupure event also marked a large faunal turnover marking the arrivals of later anthracotheres, entelodonts, ruminants (Gelocidae, Lophiomerycidae), rhinocerotoids (Rhinocerotidae, Amynodontidae, Eggysodontidae), carnivorans (later Amphicyonidae, Amphicynodontidae, Nimravidae, and Ursidae),  eastern Eurasian rodents (Eomyidae, Cricetidae, and Castoridae), and eulipotyphlans (Erinaceidae).
The Eocene-Oligocene transition of western Europe, as a result of the global climatic conditions, is marked by a transition from tropical and subtropical forests to more open, temperate or mixed deciduous habitats with adaptations to increased seasonality. As a result, a large majority of mammals endemic to Europe went extinct, including entire artiodactyl families. Notably, the last known occurrence of P. dasyuroides is in the locality of Saint-Capraise-d'Eymet, which dates to MP20. MP20 also marks the last known appearance of Hyaenodon requieni while Hyaenodon gervaisi and Cynodictis extended beyond the extinction event.
The extinction of Pterodon and survival of Hyaenodon by the Grande Coupure extinction event are notable but have no clear explanation available. The extinction causes have been attributed to climate deterioration (subsequent losses of suitable habitats and food), competition with dispersing carnivorans, or some combination of the two. However,  carnivorans playing a role in its extinction has been questioned as there’s no strong evidence of carnivorans competitively displacing hyaenodonts. Additionally, the newcomers didn’t appear in Europe until the MP21, while hyainailourines were last record in MP19-20.


Recently extinct mammals are defined by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) as any mammals that have become extinct since the year 1500 CE. Since then, roughly 80 mammal species have become extinct.
Extinction of taxa is difficult to confirm, as a long gap without a sighting is not definitive, but before 1995 a threshold of 50 years without a sighting was used to declare extinction.
One study found that extinction from habitat loss is the hardest to detect, as this might only fragment populations to the point of concealment from humans. Some mammals declared as extinct may very well reappear. For example, a study found that 36% of purported mammalian extinction had been resolved, while the rest either had validity issues (insufficient evidence) or had been rediscovered.
As of March 2026, the IUCN listed 238 mammalian species as critically endangered, while 26% of all mammalian species were threatened with extinction.
Conventions
All species listed here as extinct (no known individuals remaining) are designated by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). Species which are extinct in the wild only reside in captivity. Species listed as possibly extinct are classified as being critically endangered, as it is unknown whether or not these species are extinct. Extinct subspecies such as the Javan tiger (Panthera tigris sondaica) are not listed here as the species, in this case Panthera tigris, is still extant. The IUCN Redlist classification for each species serves as a citation, and the superscripted "IUCN" by the date is a link to that species' page. A range map is provided where available, and a description of their former or current range is given if a range map is not available.
Causes of extinction
Anthropogenic (human caused) habitat degradation is the main cause of species extinctions now. The main cause of habitat degradation worldwide is agriculture, with urban sprawl, logging, mining and some fishing practices close behind. The physical destruction of a habitat, both directly (deforestation for land development or lumber) and indirectly (burning fossil fuels), is an example of this.
Also, increasing toxicity, through media such as pesticides, can kill off a species very rapidly, by killing all living members through contamination or sterilizing them. Persistent organic pollutants (POPs), for example, can bioaccumulate to hazardous levels, getting increasingly dangerous further up the food chain.
Disease can also be a factor: white nose syndrome in bats, for example, is causing a substantial decline in their populations and may even lead to the extinction of some species.
Overhunting also has an impact. Terrestrial mammals, such as the tiger and deer, are mainly hunted for their pelts and in some cases meat, and marine mammals can be hunted for their oil and leather. Specific targeting of one species can be problematic to the ecosystem because the sudden demise of one species can inadvertently lead to the demise of another (coextinction) especially if the targeted species is a keystone species. Sea otters, for example, were hunted in the maritime fur trade, and their drop in population led to the rise in sea urchins—their main food source—which decreased the population of kelp—the sea urchin's and Steller's sea cow's main food source—leading to the extinction of the Steller's sea cow. The hunting of an already limited species can easily lead to its extinction, as with the bluebuck whose range was confined to 1,700 square miles (4,400 km2) and which was hunted into extinction soon after discovery by European settlers.
Australia
Island creatures are usually endemic to only that island, and that limited range and small population can leave them vulnerable to sudden changes. While Australia is a continent and not an island, due to its geographical isolation, its unique fauna has suffered an extreme decline in mammal species, 10% of its 273 terrestrial mammals, since European settlement (a loss of one to two species per decade). Furthermore, 21% of Australia's mammals are threatened, and unlike in most other continents, the main cause is predation by feral species, such as cats.
Extinct species
A species is declared extinct after exhaustive surveys of all potential habitats eliminate all reasonable doubt that the last individual of a species, whether in the wild or in captivity, has died. Recently extinct species are defined by the IUCN as becoming extinct after 1500 CE.
Extinct subspeciesExtinct in the wild
A species that is extinct in the wild is one which has been categorized by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) as only known by living members kept in captivity or as a naturalized population outside its historic range due to massive habitat loss. A species is declared extinct in the wild after thorough surveys have inspected its historic range and failed to find evidence of a surviving individual.
Possibly extinct
Extinction of taxa is difficult to detect, as a long gap without a sighting is not definitive. Some mammals declared as extinct may very well reappear. For example, a study found that 36% of purported mammalian extinction had been resolved, while the rest either had validity issues (insufficient evidence) or had been rediscovered. As of December 2015, the IUCN listed 30 mammalian species as "critically endangered (possibly extinct)".


Proconsul is an extinct genus of primates that existed from 21 to 17 million years ago during the Miocene epoch. Fossil remains are present in Eastern Africa, including Kenya and Uganda. Four species have been classified to date: P. africanus, P. gitongai, P. major and P. meswae. The four species differ mainly in body size. Environmental reconstructions for the Early Miocene Proconsul sites are still tentative and range from forested environments to more open, arid grasslands.
The gibbon and great apes, including humans, are held in evolutionary biology to share a common ancestral lineage, which may have included Proconsul. Its name, meaning "before Consul" (Consul being a certain chimpanzee that, at the time of the genus's discovery, was on display in London), implies that it is ancestral to the chimpanzee. It might also be ancestral to the rest of the apes.
Description
The genus had a mixture of Old World monkey and ape characteristics, so its placement in the ape superfamily Hominoidea is tentative, with some scientists placing Proconsul outside it, before the split of the apes and Old World monkeys.
Proconsul's monkey-like features include pronograde posture, indicated by a long flexible back, curved metacarpals, and an above-branch arboreal quadrupedal positional repertoire. The primary feature linking Proconsul with extant apes is its lack of a tail; other "ape-like" features include its enhanced grasping capabilities, stabilized elbow joint and facial structure. Proconsul could not hang effortlessly from tree branches like gibbons and other nonhuman apes do today.
Discovery and classification
The first specimen, a partial jaw discovered in 1909 by a gold prospector at Koru, near Kisumu in western Kenya, was also the oldest fossil hominoid known until recently, and the first fossil mammal ever found in sub-Saharan Africa. The name, Proconsul, was devised by Arthur Hopwood in 1933 and means "before Consul" – the name of a famous captive chimpanzee in London. At the time Consul was being used as a circus name for performing chimpanzees. The Folies Bergère of 1903 in Paris had a popular performing chimpanzee named Consul, and so did the Belle Vue Zoological Gardens in Manchester, England, in 1894. On the latter's death in that year Ben Brierley wrote a commemorative poem wondering where the "Missing Link" between chimpanzees and men was.

Hopwood in 1931 had discovered the fossils of three individuals while expeditioning with Louis Leakey in the vicinity of Lake Victoria. The Consul that he selected to use in the name was neither of the ones mentioned above, but another located in the London Zoo. Consul is being used Linnaean-style to symbolize the chimpanzee. Proconsul is therefore "ancestral to the Chimpanzee" in Hopwood's words. He also added africanus as the specific name.
Other fossils discovered later were initially classified as africanus and subsequently reclassified; that is, the total pool of fossils originally considered africanus was split and the fragments lumped with other finds to create a new species. For example, Mary Leakey's famous find of 1948 began as africanus and was split from it to be lumped with Thomas Whitworth's finds of 1951 as heseloni by Alan Walker in 1993. This process creates some confusion for the public, which is told that africanus became heseloni. The finds from Koru and Songhor are still considered africanus. Four species are still defined even though many fossils have jumped species.
The family of Proconsulidae was first proposed by Louis Leakey in 1963, a decade after he and Wilfrid Le Gros Clark had defined africanus, nyanzae and major. It was not immediately accepted but ultimately prevailed.
The history of hominoid classification in the second half of the 20th century is sufficiently complex to warrant a few books itself. Most of the palaeoanthropologists have changed their minds at least once as new fossils have come to light and new observations have been made, and will probably continue to do so. The classifications found in the literature of one decade are not generally the same as those of another. For example, in 1987 Peter Andrews and Lawrence Martin, established palaeontologists, took the point of view that Proconsul is not a hominoid, but is a sister taxon to it.
Reassigned species
The species Proconsul heseloni and P. nyanzae have been reclassified in the new genus Ekembo.
Palaeoecology
The landscape inhabited by Proconsul consisted of humid to subhumid forest environments with modest seasonality in precipitation patterns. Analysis of palaeosols from the site of Koru 16, where P. africanus was found, shows that P. africanus inhabited semi-deciduous tropical seasonal forests with a mean annual precipitation (MAP) of approximately 2,000 mm and a mean annual temperature (MAT) exceeding 25°C; additionally, the site also experienced episodic volcanic disturbance.


This is a list of the mammal species recorded in the Azores Islands, Portugal. Except for marine mammals and two species of bats, the Azores were completely devoid of mammals prior to their discovery in the early 15th century. All other mammals in the islands are therefore introduced species.
The following tags are used to highlight each species' conservation status as assessed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.
Order: Rodentia (rodents)
Rodents make up the largest order of mammals, with over 40% of mammalian species. They have two incisors in the upper and lower jaw which grow continually and must be kept short by gnawing. Most rodents are small though the capybara can weigh up to 45 kg (99 lb).

Suborder: Myomorpha
Family: Muridae (mice and rats)
Subfamily: Murinae
Genus: Mus
House mouse, Mus musculus LC introduced
Genus: Rattus
Brown rat, Rattus norvegicus NA introduced
Black rat, Rattus rattus LC introduced
Order: Erinaceomorpha (hedgehogs and gymnures)
The order Erinaceomorpha contains a single family, Erinaceidae, which comprise the hedgehogs and gymnures. The hedgehogs are easily recognised by their spines while gymnures look more like large rats.

Family: Erinaceidae (hedgehogs)
Subfamily: Erinaceinae
Genus: Erinaceus
European hedgehog, E. europaeus LC
Order: Chiroptera (bats)
The bats' most distinguishing feature is that their forelimbs are developed as wings, making them the only mammals capable of flight. Bat species account for about 20% of all mammals.

Family: Vespertilionidae (mouse-eared bats)
Subfamily: Myotinae
Genus: Myotis
Greater mouse-eared bat, Myotis myotis LC
Subfamily: Verpertilioninae
Genus: Nyctalus
Azores noctule, Nyctalus azoreum VU
Order: Cetacea (whales)
The order Cetacea includes whales, dolphins and porpoises. They are the mammals most fully adapted to aquatic life with a spindle-shaped nearly hairless body, protected by a thick layer of blubber, and forelimbs and tail modified to provide propulsion underwater. Many species of cetaceans reproduce around the Azores.

Suborder: Mysticeti
Family: Balaenidae
Genus: Eubalaena
North Atlantic right whale, Eubalaena glacialis CR
Family: Balaenopteridae (rorquals)
Genus: Balaenoptera
Northern minke whale, Balaenoptera acutorostrata LC
Sei whale, Balaenoptera borealis EN
Blue whale, Balaenoptera musculus EN
Fin whale, Balaenoptera physalus NT
Genus: Megaptera
Humpback whale, Megaptera novaeangliae LC
Suborder: Odontoceti
Family: Delphinidae (dolphins and pilot whales)
Genus: Globicephala
Short-finned pilot whale, Globicephala macrorhyncus DD
Long-finned pilot whale, Globicephala melas DD
Genus: Grampus
Risso's dolphin, Grampus griseus DD
Genus: Orcinus
Killer whale, Orcinus orca DD
Genus: Stenella
Striped dolphin, Stenella coeruleoalba DD
Atlantic spotted dolphin, Stenella frontalis DD
Genus: Tursiops
Common bottlenose dolphin, Tursiops truncatus DD
Family: Kogiidae (small sperm whales)
Genus: Kogia
Pygmy sperm whale, Kogia breviceps DD
Dwarf sperm whale, Kogia sima DD
Family: Physeteridae (sperm whales)
Genus: Physeter
Sperm whale, Physeter macrocephalus VU
Family: Ziphiidae (beaked whales)
Genus: Hyperoodon
Northern bottlenose whale, Hyperoodon ampullatus DD
Genus: Mesoplodon
Sowerby's beaked whale, Mesoplodon bidens DD
Blainville's beaked whale, Mesoplodon densirostris DD
Gervais' beaked whale, Mesoplodon europaeus DD
True's beaked whale, Mesoplodon mirus DD
Genus: Ziphius
Cuvier's beaked whale, Ziphius cavirostris DD
Order: Carnivora (carnivorans)
There are over 260 species of carnivorans, the majority of which feed primarily on meat. They have a characteristic skull shape and dentition.

Suborder: Caniformia
Family: Mustelidae (mustelids)
Genus: Mustela
Least weasel, Mustela nivalis LC
Family: Phocidae (earless seals)
Genus: Monachus
Mediterranean monk seal, Monachus monachus EN


There are 53 mammal species native to Ireland or naturalised in both the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland before 1500, of which 27 are terrestrial mammals and 26 are marine mammals. According to the Ireland Red List of terrestrial mammals in 2019, locally, the black rat is listed as vulnerable, the grey wolf is extinct, and the remaining  25 terrestrial mammals are least concern. Not assessed were nine mammal species that were introduced after 1500. The following tags are used to highlight each species' conservation status as assessed on the IUCN Red List:

This article is based on the Ireland Red List No. 12: Terrestrial Mammals for terrestrial mammals, and the Irish Whale and Dolphin Group list for marine mammals, unless otherwise referenced. This article refers to species' global IUCN conservation status (as opposed to local status). "Introduced" means a species is not native to Ireland and was introduced after 1500 CE. "Naturalised" means a species is not native to Ireland, but was introduced before 1500 CE, and thus is not invasive. "Vagrant" means a marine species which doesn't have an established population in Ireland, but occasionally appears there.
Diprotodontia (kangaroos and wallabies)
Although marsupials are only native to Australasia and the Americas, the red-necked wallaby has been introduced to Ireland: a population has been breeding on Lambay island since the 1950s.
Family: Macropodidae (kangaroos, wallabies, etc)

Genus: Notamacropus
Red-necked wallaby – Notamacropus rufogriseus EN (introduced)
Rodentia (rodents)
Ireland has 9 species of rodent: 3 native, 1 naturalised, and 5 introduced. Rodents are the largest order of mammals, making up over 40% of mammal species globally. They have two incisors in the upper and lower jaw which grow continually and must be kept short by gnawing.
Suborder: Sciurognathi
Family: Sciuridae (squirrels)

Subfamily: Sciurinae
Genus: Sciurus
Eastern grey squirrel – Sciurus carolinensis LC (introduced)
Red squirrel – Sciurus vulgaris LC
Family: Cricetidae (voles)

Subfamily: Arvicolinae
Genus: Clethrionomys
Bank vole – Clethrionomys glareolus LC (introduced)
Genus: Microtus
Field vole – Microtus agrestis LC (introduced)
Family: Muridae (mice, rats, etc)

Subfamily: Murinae
Genus: Apodemus
Wood mouse – Apodemus sylvaticus LC
Genus: Mus
House mouse – Mus musculus LC
Genus: Rattus
Brown rat – Rattus norvegicus LC (introduced)
Black rat – Rattus rattus LC (naturalised)
Family: Gliridae (dormice)

Subfamily: Leithiinae
Genus: Muscardinus
Hazel dormouse – Muscardinus avellanarius LC (introduced)
Lagomorpha (lagomorphs)
Ireland has 3 species of lagomorph: 1 native, 1 naturalised, and 1 introduced. Although lagomorphs can resemble rodents, and were classified as a superfamily in that order until the early 20th century, they have since been considered a separate order. They differ from rodents in a number of physical characteristics, such as having four incisors in the upper jaw rather than two.
Family: Leporidae (rabbits, hares)

Genus: Lepus
European hare – Lepus europaeus LC (introduced)
Irish hare – Lepus timidus hibernicus LC
Genus: Oryctolagus
European rabbit – Oryctolagus cuniculus EN (naturalised)
Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates)
Ireland has 6 species of even-toed ungulate: 1 native, 1 naturalised, and 4 introduced. The even-toed ungulates are ungulates whose weight is borne about equally by the third and fourth toes, rather than mostly or entirely by the third as in perissodactyls. There are about 220 artiodactyl species globally, including many that are of great economic importance to humans.
Family: Cervidae (deer)

Subfamily: Cervinae
Genus: Cervus
Red deer – Cervus elaphus LC
Sika deer – Cervus nippon LC (introduced)
Genus: Dama
European fallow deer – Dama dama LC (naturalised)
Subfamily: Capreolinae
Genus: Capreolus
Roe deer – Capreolus capreolus LC (introduced)
Genus: Muntiacus
Reeves's muntjac – Muntiacus reevesi LC (introduced)
Family: Bovidae (bovids)

Subfamily: Caprinae
Genus: Capra
Feral goat (including Irish goat) – Capra hircus (introduced)
Eulipotyphla (hedgehogs, shrews and moles)
Ireland has 3 species of Eulipotyphla: 2 native, and 1 introduced. The order Eulipotyphla contains the hedgehogs, shrews, and moles. Hedgehogs are easily recognised by their spines, shrews closely resemble mice, while moles (which are absent from Ireland) are stout-bodied burrowers.
Family: Erinaceidae (hedgehogs)

Subfamily: Erinaceinae
Genus: Erinaceus
European hedgehog – Erinaceus europaeus NT
Family: Soricidae (shrews)

Subfamily: Soricinae
Genus: Crocidura
Greater white-toothed shrew – Crocidura russula LC (introduced)
Genus: Sorex
Eurasian pygmy shrew – Sorex minutus LC
Chiroptera (bats)
Ireland has 9 species of bat: all are native. The bats' most distinguishing feature is that their forelimbs are developed as wings, making them the only mammals capable of flight. Bat species account for about 20% of all mammal species globally.
Family: Vespertilionidae (vesper bats)

Subfamily: Myotinae
Genus: Myotis
Daubenton's bat – Myotis daubentonii LC
Whiskered bat – Myotis mystacinus LC
Natterer's bat – Myotis nattereri LC
Subfamily: Vespertilioninae
Genus: Nyctalus
Lesser noctule – Nyctalus leisleri LC
Genus: Pipistrellus
Nathusius' pipistrelle – Pipistrellus nathusii LC
Common pipistrelle – Pipistrellus pipistrellus LC
Soprano pipistrelle – Pipistrellus pygmaeus LC
Genus: Plecotus
Brown long-eared bat – Plecotus auritus LC
Family: Rhinolophidae (horseshoe bats)

Subfamily: Rhinolophinae
Genus: Rhinolophus
Lesser horseshoe bat – Rhinolophus hipposideros LC
Carnivora (carnivorans)
Ireland has 14 species of carnivoran: 12 native, and 2 introduced. Carnivorans include over 260 species globally, the majority of which eat meat as their primary dietary item. They have a characteristic skull shape and dentition.
Suborder: Caniformia
Family: Canidae (dogs, foxes)

Genus: Vulpes
Red fox – Vulpes vulpes LC
Family: Mustelidae (mustelids)

Genus: Lutra
European otter – Lutra lutra NT
Genus: Martes
European pine marten – Martes martes LC
Genus: Meles
European badger – Meles meles LC
Genus: Mustela
Irish stoat – Mustela erminea hibernica LC
Feral ferret – Mustela furo (introduced)
Genus: Neogale
American mink – Neogale vison LC (introduced)
Family: Phocidae (earless seals)

Genus: Halichoerus
Grey seal – Halichoerus grypus LC
Genus: Phoca
Harbour seal – Phoca vitulina LC
Genus: Cystophora
Hooded seal – Cystophora cristatus EN (vagrant)
Genus: Erignathus
Bearded seal – Erignathus barbatus NT (vagrant)
Genus: Pagophilus
Harp seal –  Pagophilus groenlandicus NT (vagrant)
Genus: Pusa
Ringed seal – Pusa hispida LC (vagrant)
Family: Odobenidae (walruses)

Genus: Odobenus
Walrus – Odobenus rosmarus VU (vagrant)
Cetacea (whales)
Ireland has 25 cetaceans: all are native. The order Cetacea includes whales, dolphins, and porpoises. They are the mammals most fully adapted to aquatic life with a spindle-shaped, nearly hairless body protected by a thick layer of blubber, and forelimbs and tail modified to provide propulsion underwater.
Suborder: Mysticeti (baleen whales)
Family: Balaenidae

Genus: Balaena
Bowhead whale – Balaena mysticetus LC (vagrant)
Genus: Eubalaena
North Atlantic right whale – Eubalaena glacialis CR (vagrant)
Family: Balaenopteridae (rorquals)

Genus: Balaenoptera
Common minke whale – Balaenoptera acutorostrata LC
Sei whale – Balaenoptera borealis EN
Blue whale – Balaenoptera musculus EN
Fin whale – Balaenoptera physalus VU
Genus: Megaptera
Humpback whale – Megaptera novaeangliae LC
Suborder: Odontoceti (toothed whales)
Superfamily: Delphinoidea
Family: Delphinidae (marine dolphins)

Genus: Delphinus
Common dolphin – Delphinus delphis LC
Genus: Globicephala
Long-finned pilot whale – Globicephala melas LC
Genus: Grampus
Risso's dolphin – Grampus griseus LC
Genus: Lagenorhynchus
White-beaked dolphin – Lagenorhynchus albirostris LC
Genus: Leucopleurus
Atlantic white-sided dolphin – Leucopleurus acutus LC
Genus: Orcinus
Orca – Orcinus orca DD
Genus: Pseudorca
False killer whale – Pseudorca crassidens NT
Genus: Stenella
Striped dolphin – Stenella coeruleoalba LC
Genus: Tursiops
Common bottlenose dolphin – Tursiops truncatus LC
Family: Monodontidae

Genus: Delphinapterus
Beluga – Delphinapterus leucas LC (vagrant)
Family: Phocoenidae (porpoises)

Genus: Phocoena
Harbour porpoise – Phocoena phocoena LC
Superfamily: Physeteroidea
Family: Physeteridae

Genus: Physeter
Sperm whale – Physeter macrocephalus VU
Family: Kogiidae

Genus: Kogia
Pygmy sperm whale – Kogia breviceps LC
Superfamily: Ziphioidea
Family: Ziphidae (beaked whales)

Genus: Ziphius
Cuvier's beaked whale – Ziphius cavirostris LC
Subfamily: Hyperoodontinae
Genus: Hyperoodon
Northern bottlenose whale – Hyperoodon ampullatus NT
Genus: Mesoplodon
Sowerby's beaked whale – Mesoplodon bidens LC
Gervais' beaked whale – Mesoplodon europaeus LC
True's beaked whale – Mesoplodon mirus LC
Locally extinct
The following species are locally extinct in the country:

Wolf – Canis lupus, see Wolves in Ireland
Eurasian lynx – Lynx lynx
Reindeer – Rangifer tarandus
Wild boar – Sus scrofa
Brown bear – Ursus arctos, see Bears in Ireland
Globally extinct
The following species were present in Ireland, and are now extinct globally:

Irish elk – Megaloceros giganteus
Woolly mammoth – Mammuthus primigenius
Cave hyena – Crocuta spelaea


The aardvark ( ; Orycteropus afer) is a medium-sized, burrowing, nocturnal mammal native to Africa. The aardvark is the only living member of the genus Orycteropus, the family Orycteropodidae and the order Tubulidentata.
The aardvark is an afrotherian, a clade that also includes elephants, manatees, and hyraxes.
It is found over much of the southern two-thirds of the African continent, avoiding areas that are mainly rocky. A nocturnal feeder, the aardvark subsists on ants and termites (myrmecophagy) by using its sharp claws and powerful legs to dig the insects out of their hills, and its long snout to sniff out food. It digs a burrow in which to live and rear its young.
Name and taxonomyName
The aardvark is sometimes colloquially called the "African ant bear", "anteater" (not to be confused with the South American anteaters), or the "Cape anteater".
The name aardvark is Afrikaans (pronounced [ˈɑːrtfark]) and comes from earlier Afrikaans erdvark. It means 'earth pig' or 'ground pig' (aarde: 'earth', vark: 'pig, young pig'), because of its burrowing habits.
The name Orycteropus means 'burrowing foot', and the name afer refers to Africa. The name of the aardvark's order, Tubulidentata, comes from the tubule-style teeth.
Taxonomy
The aardvark is not closely related to the pig; rather, it is the sole extant representative of the obscure mammalian order Tubulidentata, in which it is usually considered to form one variable species of the genus Orycteropus, the sole surviving genus in the family Orycteropodidae. The aardvark is not closely related to the South American anteater, despite sharing some characteristics and a superficial resemblance. The similarities are the outcome of convergent evolution. The closest living relatives of the aardvark are the elephant shrews, Tenrecidae, and golden moles. Along with sirenians, hyraxes, elephants, and their extinct relatives, these animals form the superorder Afrotheria. Studies of the brain have shown the similarities with Condylarthra.
Evolutionary history
Based on his study of fossils, Bryan Patterson has concluded that early relatives of the aardvark appeared in Africa around the end of the Paleocene. The ptolemaiidans, a clade of mammals with uncertain affinities, may actually be stem-aardvarks, either as a sister clade to Tubulidentata or as a grade leading to true tubulidentates.
The first unambiguous tubulidentate was probably Myorycteropus africanus from Kenyan Miocene deposits. The earliest example from the genus Orycteropus was Orycteropus mauritanicus, found in Algeria in deposits from the middle Miocene, with an equally old version found in Kenya. Fossils from the aardvark have been dated to 5 million years, and have been located throughout Europe and the Near East.
The Pleistocene Plesiorycteropus from Madagascar was originally thought to be a tubulidentate that was descended from ancestors that entered the island during the Eocene. However, a number of subtle anatomical differences coupled with recent molecular evidence now lead researchers to believe that Plesiorycteropus is a relative of golden moles and tenrecs that achieved an aardvark-like appearance and ecological niche through convergent evolution.
Subspecies
The aardvark has seventeen poorly defined subspecies:

Orycteropus afer afer (Southern aardvark)
O. a. adametzi Grote, 1921 (Western aardvark)
O. a. aethiopicus Sundevall, 1843
O. a. angolensis Zukowsky & Haltenorth, 1957
O. a. erikssoni Lönnberg, 1906
O. a. faradjius Hatt, 1932
O. a. haussanus Matschie, 1900
O. a. kordofanicus Rothschild, 1927
O. a. lademanni Grote, 1911
O. a. leptodon Hirst, 1906
O. a. matschiei Grote, 1921
O. a. observandus Grote, 1921
O. a. ruvanensis Grote, 1921
O. a. senegalensis Lesson, 1840
O. a. somalicus Lydekker, 1908
O. a. wardi Lydekker, 1908
O. a. wertheri Matschie, 1898 (Eastern aardvark)
Description
The aardvark is vaguely pig-like in appearance. Its body is stout with a prominently arched back and is sparsely covered with coarse hairs. The limbs are of moderate length, with the rear legs being longer than the forelegs. The front feet have lost the pollex (or 'thumb'), resulting in four toes, while the rear feet have all five toes. Each toe bears a large, robust nail which is somewhat flattened and shovel-like, and appears to be intermediate between a claw and a hoof. Whereas the aardvark is considered digitigrade, it appears at times to be plantigrade. This confusion happens because when it squats it stands on its soles. A contributing characteristic to the burrow digging capabilities of aardvarks is an endosteal tissue called compacted coarse cancellous bone (CCCB). The stress and strain resistance provided by CCCB allows aardvarks to create their burrows, ultimately leading to a favourable environment for plants and a variety of animals. Digging is also facilitated by its forearm's unusually stout ulna and radius.
Body weight is typically between 60 and 80 kilograms (130–180 lb). An aardvark's length is usually between 105 and 130 centimetres (41–51 in; 3.44–4.27 ft), and can reach lengths of 2.2 metres (7 ft 3 in) when its tail (which can be up to 70 centimetres (28 in; 2.3 ft)) is taken into account. It is 60 centimetres (24 in; 2.0 ft) tall at the shoulder, and has a girth of about 100 centimetres (39 in; 3.3 ft). It does not exhibit sexual dimorphism.
It is the largest member of the clade Afroinsectiphilia. The aardvark is pale yellowish-grey in colour and often stained reddish-brown by soil. The aardvark's coat is thin, and the animal's primary protection is its tough skin. Its hair is short on its head and tail; however its legs tend to have longer hair. On the majority of its body, the hairs are grouped in clusters of three to four.
Head
The greatly elongated head is set on a short, thick neck, and the end of the snout bears a disc, which houses the nostrils. It contains a thin but complete zygomatic arch. The head of the aardvark contains many unique and different features. One of the most distinctive characteristics of the Tubulidentata is their teeth. Instead of having a pulp cavity, each tooth has a cluster of thin, hexagonal, upright, parallel tubes of vasodentin (a modified form of dentine), with individual pulp canals, held together by cementum. The number of columns is dependent on the size of the tooth, with the largest having about 1,500. The teeth have no enamel coating and are worn away and regrow continuously. The aardvark is born with conventional incisors and canines at the front of the jaw, which fall out and are not replaced. Adult aardvarks have only cheek teeth at the back of the jaw, and have a dental formula of: 0.0.2-3.30.0.2.3 These remaining teeth are peg-like and rootless and are of unique composition. The teeth consist of 14 upper and 12 lower jaw molars. The nasal area of the aardvark is another unique area, as it contains ten nasal conchae, more than any other placental mammal.
The sides of the nostrils are thick with hair. The tip of the snout is highly mobile and is moved by modified mimetic muscles. The fleshy dividing tissue between its nostrils probably has sensory functions, but it is uncertain whether they are olfactory or vibratory in nature. Its nose is made up of more turbinate bones than any other mammal, with between nine and 11, compared to dogs with four to five. With a large quantity of turbinate bones, the aardvark has more space for the moist epithelium, which is the location of the olfactory bulb. The nose contains nine olfactory bulbs, more than any other mammal. Its keen sense of smell is not just from the quantity of bulbs in the nose but also in the development of the brain, as its olfactory lobe is very developed. The snout resembles an elongated pig snout. The mouth is small and tubular, typical of species that feed on ants and termites. The aardvark has a long, thin, snakelike, protruding tongue (as much as 30 centimetres (12 in) long) and elaborate structures supporting a keen sense of smell. The ears, which are very effective, are disproportionately long, about 20–25 centimetres (7.9–9.8 in) long. The eyes are small for its head, and consist only of rods.
Digestive system
The aardvark's stomach has a muscular pyloric area that acts as a gizzard to grind swallowed food up, thereby rendering chewing unnecessary. Its cecum is large. Both sexes emit a strong smelling secretion from an anal gland. Its salivary glands are highly developed and almost completely ring the neck; their output is what causes the tongue to maintain its tackiness. The female has two pairs of teats in the inguinal region.
Genetically speaking, the aardvark is a living fossil, as its chromosomes are highly conserved, reflecting much of the early eutherian arrangement before the divergence of the major modern taxa.
Habitat and range
Aardvarks are found in sub-Saharan Africa, where suitable habitat (savannas, grasslands, woodlands and bushland) and food (i.e., ants and termites) is available. They spend the daylight hours in dark burrows to avoid the heat of the day. The only major habitat that they are not present in is swamp forest, as the high water table precludes digging to a sufficient depth. They also avoid terrain rocky enough to cause problems with digging. They have been documented as high as 3,200 metres (10,500 ft) in Ethiopia. They can be found throughout sub-Saharan Africa from Ethiopia all the way to Cape of Good Hope in South Africa with few exceptions including the coastal areas of Namibia, Ivory Coast, and Ghana. They are not found in Madagascar.
Ecology and behaviour
Aardvarks live for up to 23 years in captivity. Its keen hearing warns it of predators: lions, leopards, hyenas, and pythons. Some humans also hunt aardvarks for meat. Aardvarks can dig fast or run in zigzag fashion to elude enemies, but if all else fails, they will strike with their claws, tail and shoulders, sometimes flipping onto their backs lying motionless except to lash out with all four feet. They are capable of causing substantial damage to unprotected areas of an attacker. They will also dig to escape as they can. Sometimes, when pressed, aardvarks can dig extremely quickly.
Feeding
The aardvark is nocturnal and is a solitary creature that feeds almost exclusively on ants and termites (myrmecophagy); studies in the Nama Karoo revealed that ants, especially Anoplolepis custodiens, were the predominant prey year-round, followed by termites like Trinervitermes trinervoides. In winter, when ant numbers declined, aardvarks relied more on termites, often feeding on epigeal mounds coinciding with the presence of alates, possibly to meet their nutritional needs. They avoid eating the African driver ant and red ants. Due to their stringent diet requirements, they require a large range to survive.
The only fruit eaten by aardvarks is the aardvark cucumber. In fact, the cucumber and the aardvark have a symbiotic relationship as they eat the subterranean fruit, then defecate the seeds near their burrows, which then grow rapidly due to the loose soil and fertile nature of the area. The time spent in the intestine of the aardvark helps the fertility of the seed, and the fruit provides needed moisture for the aardvark.
An aardvark emerges from its burrow in the late afternoon or shortly after sunset, and forages over a considerable home range encompassing 10 to 30 kilometres (6.2 to 18.6 mi). While foraging for food, the aardvark will keep its nose to the ground and its ears pointed forward, which indicates that both smell and hearing are involved in the search for food. They zig-zag as they forage and will usually not repeat a route for five to eight days as they appear to allow time for the termite nests to recover before feeding on it again.
During a foraging period, they will stop to dig a V-shaped trench with their forefeet and then sniff it profusely as a means to explore their location. When a concentration of ants or termites is detected, the aardvark digs into it with its powerful front legs, keeping its long ears upright to listen for predators, and takes up an astonishing number of insects with its long, sticky tongue—as many as 50,000 in one night have been recorded. Its claws enable it to dig through the extremely hard crust of a termite or ant mound quickly. It avoids inhaling the dust by sealing the nostrils. When successful, the aardvark's long (up to 30 centimetres (12 in)) tongue licks up the insects; the termites' biting, or the ants' stinging attacks are rendered futile by the tough skin. After an aardvark visit at a termite mound, other animals will visit to pick up all the leftovers. Termite mounds alone do not provide enough food for the aardvark, so they look for termites that are on the move. When these insects move, they can form columns 10–40 metres (33–131 ft) long and these tend to provide easy pickings with little effort exerted by the aardvark. These columns are more common in areas of livestock or other hoofed animals. The trampled grass and dung attract termites from the Odontotermes, Microtermes, and Pseudacanthotermes genera.
On a nightly basis they tend to be more active during the first portion of night (roughly the four hours between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m.); however, they do not seem to prefer bright or dark nights over the other. During adverse weather or if disturbed they will retreat to their burrow systems. They cover between 2 and 5 kilometres (1.2 and 3.1 mi) per night; however, some studies have shown that they may traverse as far as 30 kilometres (19 mi) in a night.
Aardvarks shift their circadian rhythms to more diurnal activity patterns in response to a reduced food supply. This survival tactic may signify an increased risk of imminent mortality.
Vocalisation
The aardvark is a rather quiet animal. However, it does make soft grunting sounds as it forages and loud grunts as it makes for its tunnel entrance. It makes a bleating sound if frightened. When it is threatened it will make for one of its burrows. If one is not close it will dig a new one rapidly. This new one will be short and require the aardvark to back out when the coast is clear.
Movement
The aardvark is a good swimmer and can swim in strong currents. It can dig a yard of tunnel in about five minutes, but otherwise moves fairly slowly. When leaving the burrow at night, it pauses at the entrance for about ten minutes, sniffing and listening. After this period of watchfulness, it bounds out to a distance of some 10 metres (33 ft). It then pauses, pricks its ears, twisting its head to listen, before moving off to forage.
Aside from digging out ants and termites, the aardvark also excavates burrows in which to live, which generally fall into one of three categories: burrows made while foraging, refuge and resting location, and permanent homes. Temporary sites are scattered around the home range and are used as refuges, while the main burrow is also used for breeding. Main burrows can be deep and extensive, have several entrances and can be as long as 13 metres (43 ft). These burrows can be large enough for a person to enter. The aardvark changes the layout of its home burrow regularly, and periodically moves on and makes a new one. The old burrows are an important part of the African wildlife scene. As they are vacated, then they are inhabited by smaller animals like the African wild dog, ant-eating chat, Nycteris thebaica and warthogs. Other animals that use them are hares, mongooses, hyenas, owls, pythons, and lizards. Without these refuges many animals would die during wildfire season. Only mothers and young share burrows; however, the aardvark is known to live in small family groups or as a solitary creature. If attacked in the tunnel, it will escape by digging out of the tunnel thereby placing the fresh fill between it and its predator, or if it decides to fight it will roll onto its back, and attack with its claws. The aardvark has been known to sleep in a recently excavated ant nest, which also serves as protection from its predators.
Reproduction
It is believed to exhibit polygamous breeding behavior. During mating, the male secures himself to the female's back using his claws, which can occasionally result in noticeable scratches. Males play no role on parental care.
Aardvarks pair only during the breeding season; after a gestation period of seven months, one cub weighing around 1.7–1.9 kilograms (3.7–4.2 lb) is born during May–July. When born, the young has flaccid ears and many wrinkles. When nursing, it will nurse off each teat in succession. After two weeks, the folds of skin disappear and after three, the ears can be held upright. After 5–6 weeks, body hair starts growing. It is able to leave the burrow to accompany its mother after only two weeks and eats termites at nine weeks, and is weaned between three months and 16 weeks. At six months of age, it is able to dig its own burrows, but it will often remain with the mother until the next mating season, and is sexually mature from approximately two years of age.
Conservation
Aardvarks were thought to have declining numbers, however, this is possibly because they are not readily seen. There are no definitive counts because of their nocturnal and secretive habits; however, their numbers seem to be stable overall. They are not considered common anywhere in Africa, but due to their large range, they maintain sufficient numbers. There may be a slight decrease in numbers in eastern, northern, and western Africa. Southern African numbers are not decreasing. It has received an official designation from the IUCN as least concern. However, the species is in a precarious situation, as they are so dependent on such specific food; therefore if a problem arises with the abundance of termites, the species as a whole would be affected drastically.
Recent research suggests that aardvarks may be particularly vulnerable to alterations in temperature caused by climate change. Droughts negatively impact the availability of termites and ants, which comprise the bulk of an aardvark's diet. Nocturnal species faced with resource scarcity may increase their diurnal activity to spare the energy costs of staying warm at night, but this comes at the cost of withstanding high temperatures during the day. A study on aardvarks in the Kalahari Desert saw that five out of six aardvarks being studied perished following a drought.
Aardvarks adapt well to captivity. The first recorded instance was at London Zoo in 1869, which housed an individual from South Africa.
Mythology and popular culture
In African folklore, the aardvark is admired because of its diligent quest for food and its fearless response to soldier ants. Hausa magicians make a charm from the heart, skin, forehead, and nails of the aardvark, which they then proceed to pound together with the root of a certain tree. Wrapped in a piece of skin and worn on the chest, the charm is said to give the owner the ability to pass through walls or roofs at night. The charm is said to be used by burglars and those seeking to visit young girls without their parents' permission. Some tribes, such as the Margbetu and Logo, use aardvark teeth to make bracelets as good luck charms. The meat, which bears a resemblance to pork, is eaten in certain cultures. In the mythology of the Dagbon people of Ghana, the aardvark is believed to possess supernatural powers. The ancient Egyptian god Set is usually depicted with the head of an unidentified animal, whose similarity to an aardvark has been noted in scholarship.
The fictional character Arthur Read and his family from the children's book series by Marc Brown, as well as the animated adaptation Arthur, is an aardvark. In the first book of the series, Arthur's Nose (1976), he has a long, aardvark-like nose, but in later books, his face becomes more rounded.
The 1969–1971 cartoon film series The Ant and the Aardvark portrayed a blue aardvark character trying to catch and eat a red ant character. The series became extremely popular on television when paired with NBC's The Pink Panther Show. In BBC Radio's The Goon Show of the 1950s, aardvarks regularly appeared, with humorous phrases such as "spotted aardvark pudding" or "how to make your aardvark soft again".


Mammal is the self-titled debut extended play (EP) by Australian hard rock band, Mammal from 2006. The band sold the EP independently at their live shows and on their website until early 2007 when they signed with Metropolitan Groove Merchants (MGM) to distribute it independently. The original version (no longer in print) was replaced by the MGM version, released in March. The EP peaked into the top 20 of the AIR Charts.
Background
Mammal formed in Melbourne, Australia in March 2006 when vocalist Ezekiel Ox (ex-Full Scale Deflection, Full Scale) joined guitarist Pete Williamson (ex-Pete Murray & the Stonemasons) who was writing songs with session bass guitarist, Nick Adams; the trio were joined by drummer, Zane Rosanoski. In mid-2006, they entered the Sing Sing Studios to record their self-titled debut five-track Extended Play (EP), Mammal, which was sold independently at their live shows and on their website. By early 2007, they signed with Metropolitan Groove Merchants (MGM) which distributed their EP from March, which peaked into the top 20 of the AIR Charts.
On 2 February, they recorded a live performance at the Evelyn Hotel and released their first live album, Vol 1: The Aural Underground in August. For this album, all five tracks from the EP had been recorded live with five additional tracks.
Track listing
Australian CD EP MAMMAL001 [MGM/Independent Version]


This is a list of the mammal species recorded in Tokelau. There are five mammal species in the waters off Tokelau, all of which are of the order Cetacea.
Order: Cetacea (whales)
The order Cetacea includes whales, dolphins and porpoises. They are the mammals most fully adapted to aquatic life with a spindle-shaped nearly hairless body, protected by a thick layer of blubber, and forelimbs and tail modified to provide propulsion underwater.

Suborder: Odontoceti
Family: Physeteridae
Genus: Physeter
Sperm whale, Physeter macrocephalus VU
Superfamily: Platanistoidea
Family: Ziphidae
Subfamily: Hyperoodontinae
Genus: Mesoplodon
Blainville's beaked whale, Mesoplodon densirostris DD
Ginkgo-toothed beaked whale, Mesoplodon ginkgodens DD
Family: Delphinidae (marine dolphins)
Genus: Stenella
Spinner dolphin, Stenella longirostris LR/cd
Genus: Feresa
Pygmy killer whale, Feresa attenuata DD


This is a list of the mammal species recorded in Thailand.
Order: Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates and cetaceans)Order: Carnivora (felids, canids, and allies)Order: Chiroptera (bats)Order: Dermoptera (colugos)Order: Eulipotyphla (hedgehogs, shrews, moles and relatives)Order: Lagomorpha (lagomorphs)Order: Perissodactyla (odd-toed ungulates)Order: Pholidota (pangolins)Order: PrimatesOrder: Proboscidea (elephants)Order: Rodentia (rodents)Order: Scandentia (treeshrews)Order: Sirenia (manatees and dugongs)


The subfamily Caprinae, also sometimes referred to as the tribe Caprini, is part of the ruminant family Bovidae, and consists of mostly medium-sized bovids.  A member of this subfamily is called a caprine.
Prominent members include sheep and goats, with some other members referred to as goat antelopes. Some earlier taxonomies considered Caprinae a separate family called Capridae (with the members being caprids), but now it is usually considered either a subfamily within the Bovidae, or a tribe within the subfamily Antilopinae of the family Bovidae, with caprines being a type of bovid.
Characteristics
Although most goat-antelopes are gregarious and have fairly stocky builds, they diverge in many other ways – the muskox (Ovibos moschatus) is adapted to the extreme cold of the tundra; the mountain goat (Oreamnos americanus) of North America is specialised for very rugged terrain; the urial (Ovis orientalis) occupies a largely infertile area from Kashmir to Iran, including much desert country. The Armenian mouflon (Ovis  gmelini gmelini) is thought to be the ancestor of the modern domestic sheep (Ovis aries).
Many species have become extinct since the last ice age, probably largely because of human interaction. Of the survivors:

Five are classified as endangered
Eight as vulnerable
Seven as of concern and needing conservation measures, but at lower risk
Seven species are secure
Members of the group vary considerably in size, from just over 1 m (3 ft) long for a full-grown grey goral (Naemorhedus goral), to almost 2.5 m (8 ft 2 in) long for a musk ox, and from under 30 kg (66 lb) to more than 350 kg (770 lb). Musk oxen in captivity have reached over 650 kg (1,430 lb).
The lifestyles of caprids fall into two broad classes: 'resource-defenders', which are territorial and defend a small, food-rich area against other members of the same species; and 'grazers', which gather together into herds and roam freely over a larger, usually relatively infertile area.
The resource-defenders are the more primitive group: they tend to be smaller, dark in colour, males and females fairly alike, have long, tessellated ears, long manes, and dagger-shaped horns. The grazers (sometimes collectively known as tsoan caprids, from the Hebrew tso'n meaning sheep and goats) evolved more recently. They tend to be larger, highly social, and rather than mark territory with scent glands, they have highly evolved dominance behaviours. No sharp line divides the groups, but a continuum varies from the serows at one end of the spectrum to sheep, true goats, and musk oxen at the other.
Evolution
The goat-antelope, or caprid, group is known from as early as the Miocene, when members of the group resembled the modern serow in their general body form. The group did not reach its greatest diversity until the recent ice ages, when many of its members became specialised for marginal, often extreme, environments: mountains, deserts, and the subarctic region.
The ancestors of the modern sheep and goats (both rather vague and ill-defined terms) are thought to have moved into mountainous regions – sheep becoming specialised occupants of the foothills and nearby plains, and relying on flight and flocking for defence against predators, and goats adapting to very steep terrain where predators are at a disadvantage.
Internal relationships of Caprinae based on mitochondrial DNA.
Species
Phylogeny based on Hassanin et al., 2009 and Calamari, 2021.
Fossil genera
The following extinct genera of Caprinae have been identified:

Tribe Caprini
Genus Myotragus †
Myotragus balearicus†
Tribe Ovibovini
Genus Bootherium †
Bootherium bombifrons†
Genus Euceratherium †
Euceratherium collinum†
Genus Makapania †
Makapania broomi†
Genus Megalovis †
Genus Soergelia †
Soergelia mayfieldi†
Genus Speleotherium †
Speleotherium logani†
Genus Tsaidamotherium †
Tsaidamotherium brevirostrum†
Tsaidamotherium hedini†
Unsorted


In biology, homology is similarity in anatomical structures or genes between organisms of different taxa due to shared ancestry, regardless of current functional differences. Evolutionary biology explains homologous structures as retained heredity from a common ancestor after having been subjected to adaptive modifications for different purposes as the result of natural selection.
The term was first applied to biology in a non-evolutionary context by the anatomist Richard Owen in 1843. Homology was later explained by Charles Darwin's theory of evolution in 1859, but had been observed before this from Aristotle's biology onwards, and it was explicitly analysed by Pierre Belon in 1555. A common example of homologous structures is the forelimbs of vertebrates, where the wings of bats and birds, the arms of primates, the front flippers of whales, and the forelegs of four-legged vertebrates like horses and crocodilians are all derived from the same ancestral tetrapod structure.
In developmental biology, organs that developed in the embryo in the same manner and from similar origins, such as from matching primordia in successive segments of the same animal, are serially homologous. Examples include the legs of a centipede, the maxillary and labial palps of an insect, and the spinous processes of successive vertebrae in a vertebrate's backbone.
Sequence homology between protein or DNA sequences is similarly defined in terms of shared ancestry. Two segments of DNA can have shared ancestry because of either a speciation event (orthologs) or a duplication event (paralogs). Homology among proteins or DNA is inferred from their sequence similarity. Significant similarity is strong evidence that two sequences are related by divergent evolution from a common ancestor. Alignments of multiple sequences are used to discover the homologous regions.
Homology remains controversial in animal behaviour, but there is suggestive evidence that, for example, dominance hierarchies are homologous across the primates.
History
Homology was noticed by Aristotle (c. 350 BC), and was explicitly analysed by Pierre Belon in his 1555 Book of Birds, where he systematically compared the skeletons of birds and humans. The pattern of similarity was interpreted as part of the static great chain of being through the mediaeval and early modern periods: it was not then seen as implying evolutionary change. In the German Naturphilosophie tradition, homology was of special interest as demonstrating unity in nature. In 1790, Goethe stated his foliar theory in his essay "Metamorphosis of Plants", showing that flower parts are derived from leaves. The serial homology of limbs was described late in the 18th century. The French zoologist Étienne Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire showed in 1818 in his theorie d'analogue ("theory of homologues") that structures were shared between fishes, reptiles, birds and mammals. When Geoffroy went further and sought homologies between Georges Cuvier's embranchements, such as vertebrates and molluscs, his claims triggered the 1830 Cuvier–Geoffroy debate. Geoffroy stated the principle of connections, namely that what is important is the relative position of different structures and their connections to each other.
The embryologist Karl Ernst von Baer stated what are now called von Baer's laws in 1828, noting that related animals begin their development as similar embryos and then diverge: thus, animals in the same family are more closely related and diverge later than animals which are only in the same order and have fewer homologies. Von Baer's theory recognises that each taxon (such as a family) has distinctive shared features, and that embryonic development parallels the taxonomic hierarchy: not the same as recapitulation theory. The term "homology" was first used in biology by the anatomist Richard Owen in 1843 when studying the similarities of vertebrate fins and limbs, defining it as the "same organ in different animals under every variety of form and function", and contrasting it with the matching term "analogy" which he used to describe different structures with the same function. Owen codified three main criteria for determining if features were homologous: position, development and composition. In 1859, Charles Darwin explained homologous structures as meaning that the organisms concerned shared a body plan from a common ancestor, and that taxa were branches of a single tree of life.
Definition
The word homology, coined in about 1656, is derived from the Greek ὁμόλογος homologos from ὁμός homos 'same' and λόγος logos 'relation'.
Similar biological structures or sequences in different taxa are homologous if they are derived from a common ancestor. Homology thus implies divergent evolution. For example, many insects (such as dragonflies) possess two pairs of flying wings. In beetles, the first pair of wings has evolved into a pair of hard wing covers, while in dipteran flies the second pair of wings has evolved into small halteres used for balance.
Similarly, the forelimbs of ancestral vertebrates have evolved into the front flippers of whales, the wings of birds, the running forelegs of dogs, deer and horses, the short forelegs of frogs and lizards, and the grasping hands of primates including humans. The same major forearm bones (humerus, radius and ulna) are found in fossils of lobe-finned fish such as Eusthenopteron.
Homology vs. analogy
The opposite of homologous organs are analogous organs which do similar jobs in two taxa that were not present in their most recent common ancestor but, rather, evolved separately. For example, the wings of insects and birds evolved independently in widely separated groups, and converged functionally to support powered flight, so they are analogous. Similarly, the wings of a sycamore maple seed and the wings of a bird are analogous but not homologous, as they develop from quite different structures. A structure can be homologous at one level, but only analogous at another. Pterosaur, bird and bat wings are analogous as wings, but homologous as forelimbs because the organ served as a forearm (not a wing) in the last common ancestor of tetrapods, and evolved in different ways in the three groups. Thus, in the pterosaurs, the "wing" involves both the forelimb and the hindlimb. Analogy is called homoplasy in cladistics, and convergent or parallel evolution in evolutionary biology.
In cladistics
Specialised terms are used in taxonomic research. Primary homology is a researcher's initial hypothesis based on similar structure or anatomical connections, suggesting that a character state in two or more taxa share is shared due to common ancestry. Primary homology may be conceptually broken down further: we may consider all of the states of the same character as "homologous" parts of a single, unspecified, transformation series. This has been referred to as topographical correspondence. For example, in an aligned DNA sequence matrix, all of the A, G, C, T or implied gaps at a given nucleotide site are homologous in this way. Character state identity is the hypothesis that the particular condition in two or more taxa is "the same" as far as our character coding scheme is concerned. Thus, two Adenines at the same aligned nucleotide site are hypothesized to be homologous unless that hypothesis is subsequently contradicted by other evidence. Secondary homology is implied by parsimony analysis, where a character state that arises only once on a tree is taken to be homologous. As implied in this definition, many cladists consider secondary homology to be synonymous with synapomorphy, a shared derived character or trait state that distinguishes a clade from other organisms.
Shared ancestral character states, symplesiomorphies, represent either synapomorphies of a more inclusive group, or complementary states (often absences) that unite no natural group of organisms. For example, the presence of wings is a synapomorphy for pterygote insects, but a symplesiomorphy for holometabolous insects. Absence of wings in non-pterygote insects and other organisms is a complementary symplesiomorphy that unites no group (for example, absence of wings provides no evidence of common ancestry of silverfish, spiders and annelid worms). On the other hand, absence (or secondary loss) of wings is a synapomorphy for fleas. Patterns such as these lead many cladists to consider the concept of homology and the concept of synapomorphy to be equivalent. Some cladists follow the pre-cladistic definition of homology of Haas and Simpson, and view both synapomorphies and symplesiomorphies as homologous character states.
In different taxa
Homologies provide the fundamental basis for all biological classification, although some may be highly counter-intuitive. For example, deep homologies like the pax6 genes that control the development of the eyes of vertebrates and arthropods were unexpected, as the organs are anatomically dissimilar and appeared to have evolved entirely independently.
In arthropods
The embryonic body segments (somites) of different arthropod taxa have diverged from a simple body plan with many similar appendages which are serially homologous, into a variety of body plans with fewer segments equipped with specialised appendages. The homologies between these have been discovered by comparing genes in evolutionary developmental biology.

Among insects, the stinger of the female honey bee is a modified ovipositor, homologous with ovipositors in other insects such as the Orthoptera, Hemiptera and those Hymenoptera without stingers.
In mammals
The three small bones in the middle ear of mammals including humans, the malleus, incus and stapes, are today used to transmit sound from the eardrum to the inner ear. The malleus and incus develop in the embryo from structures that form jaw bones (the quadrate and the articular) in lizards, and in fossils of lizard-like ancestors of mammals. Both lines of evidence show that these bones are homologous, sharing a common ancestor.
Among the many homologies in mammal reproductive systems, ovaries and testicles are homologous.
Rudimentary organs such as the human tailbone, now much reduced from their functional state, are readily understood as signs of evolution, the explanation being that they were cut down by natural selection from functioning organs when their functions were no longer needed, but make no sense at all if species are considered to be fixed. The tailbone is homologous to the tails of other primates.
In plantsLeaves, stems and roots
In many plants, defensive or storage structures are made by modifications of the development of primary leaves, stems and roots. Leaves are variously modified from photosynthetic structures to form the insect-trapping pitchers of pitcher plants, the insect-trapping jaws of the Venus flytrap, and the spines of cacti, all homologous.

Certain compound leaves of flowering plants are partially homologous both to leaves and shoots, because their development has evolved from a genetic mosaic of leaf and shoot development.
Flower parts
The four types of flower parts, namely carpels, stamens, petals and sepals, are homologous with and derived from leaves, as Goethe correctly noted in 1790. The development of these parts through a pattern of gene expression in the growing zones (meristems) is described by the ABC model of flower development. Each of the four types of flower parts is serially repeated in concentric whorls, controlled by a small number of genes acting in various combinations. Thus, A genes working alone result in sepal formation; A and B together produce petals; B and C together create stamens; C alone produces carpels. When none of the genes are active, leaves are formed. Two more groups of genes, D to form ovules and E for the floral whorls, complete the model. The genes are evidently ancient, as old as the flowering plants themselves.
Developmental biology
Developmental biology can identify homologous structures that arose from the same tissue in embryogenesis. For example, adult snakes have no legs, but their early embryos have limb-buds for hind legs, which are soon lost as the embryos develop. The implication that the ancestors of snakes had hind legs is confirmed by fossil evidence: the Cretaceous snake Pachyrhachis problematicus had hind legs complete with hip bones (ilium, pubis, ischium), thigh bone (femur), leg bones (tibia, fibula) and foot bones (calcaneum, astragalus) as in tetrapods with legs today.
Sequence homology
As with anatomical structures, sequence homology between protein or DNA sequences is defined in terms of shared ancestry. Two segments of DNA can have shared ancestry because of either a speciation event (orthologs) or a duplication event (paralogs). Homology among proteins or DNA is typically inferred from their sequence similarity. Significant similarity is strong evidence that two sequences are related by divergent evolution of a common ancestor. Alignments of multiple sequences are used to indicate which regions of each sequence are homologous.
Homologous sequences are orthologous if they are descended from the same ancestral sequence separated by a speciation event: when a species diverges into two separate species, the copies of a single gene in the two resulting species are said to be orthologous. The term "ortholog" was coined in 1970 by the molecular evolutionist Walter Fitch.
Homologous sequences are paralogous if they were created by a duplication event within the genome. For gene duplication events, if a gene in an organism is duplicated, the two copies are paralogous. They can shape the structure of whole genomes and thus explain genome evolution to a large extent. Examples include the Homeobox (Hox) genes in animals. These genes not only underwent gene duplications within chromosomes but also whole genome duplications. As a result, Hox genes in most vertebrates are spread across multiple chromosomes: the HoxA–D clusters are the best studied.
Some sequences are homologous, but they have diverged so much that their sequence similarity is not sufficient to establish homology. However, many proteins have retained very similar structures, and structural alignment can be used to demonstrate their homology.
In behaviour
It has been suggested that some behaviours might be homologous, based either on sharing across related taxa or on common origins of the behaviour in an individual's development; however, the notion of homologous behavior remains controversial, largely because behavior is more prone to multiple realizability than other biological traits. For example, D. W. Rajecki and Randall C. Flanery, using data on humans and on nonhuman primates, argue that patterns of behaviour in dominance hierarchies are homologous across the primates.

As with morphological features or DNA, shared similarity in behavior provides evidence for common ancestry. The hypothesis that a behavioral character is not homologous should be based on an incongruent distribution of that character with respect to other features that are presumed to reflect the true pattern of relationships. This is an application of Willi Hennig's auxiliary principle.


The Paleocene (IPA:  PAL-ee-ə-seen, -⁠ee-oh-, PAY-lee-), or Palaeocene, is a geological epoch that lasted from about 66 to 56 Ma (million years ago). It is the first epoch of the Paleogene Period in the modern Cenozoic Era. The name comes from Ancient Greek παλαιός (palaiós), meaning "old", and καινός (kainós), meaning "new", translating to "the old part of the Eocene".
The epoch is bracketed by two major events in Earth's history. The K–Pg extinction event, brought on by an asteroid impact (Chicxulub impact) and possibly volcanism (Deccan Traps), marked the beginning of the Paleocene and killed off 75% of species, most famously the non-avian dinosaurs. The end of the epoch was marked by the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM), which was a major climatic event wherein about 2,500–4,500 gigatons of carbon were released into the atmosphere and ocean systems, causing a spike in global temperatures and ocean acidification.
In the Paleocene, the continents of the Northern Hemisphere were still connected via some land bridges; and South America, Antarctica, and Australia had not completely separated yet. The Rocky Mountains were being uplifted, the Americas had not yet joined, the Indian Plate had begun its collision with Asia, and the North Atlantic Igneous Province was forming in the third-largest magmatic event of the last 150 million years. In the oceans, the thermohaline circulation probably was much different from what it is today, with downwellings occurring in the North Pacific rather than the North Atlantic, and water density mainly being controlled by salinity rather than temperature.
The K–Pg extinction event caused a floral and faunal turnover of species, with previously abundant species being replaced by previously uncommon ones. In the Paleocene, with a global average temperature of about 24–25 °C (75–77 °F), compared to 14 °C (57 °F) in more recent times, the Earth had a greenhouse climate without permanent ice sheets at the poles, like the preceding Mesozoic. As such, there were forests worldwide—including at the poles—but they had low species richness in regards to plant life, and were populated by mainly small creatures that were rapidly evolving to take advantage of the recently emptied Earth. Though some animals attained great size, most remained rather small. The forests grew quite dense in the general absence of large herbivores. Mammals proliferated in the Paleocene, and the earliest placental and marsupial mammals are recorded from this time, but most Paleocene taxa have ambiguous affinities. In the seas, ray-finned fish rose to dominate open ocean and recovering reef ecosystems.
Etymology
The word "Paleocene" was first used by French paleobotanist and geologist Wilhelm Philipp Schimper in 1874 while describing deposits near Paris (spelled "Paléocène" in his treatise). By this time, Italian geologist Giovanni Arduino had divided the history of life on Earth into the Primary (Paleozoic), Secondary (Mesozoic), and Tertiary in 1759; French geologist Jules Desnoyers had proposed splitting off the Quaternary from the Tertiary in 1829; and Scottish geologist Charles Lyell (ignoring the Quaternary) had divided the Tertiary Epoch into the Eocene, Miocene, Pliocene, and New Pliocene (Holocene) Periods in 1833. British geologist John Phillips had proposed the Cenozoic in 1840 in place of the Tertiary, and Austrian paleontologist Moritz Hörnes had introduced the Paleogene for the Eocene and Neogene for the Miocene and Pliocene in 1853. After decades of inconsistent usage, the newly formed International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS), in 1969, standardized stratigraphy based on the prevailing opinions in Europe: the Cenozoic Era subdivided into the Tertiary and Quaternary sub-eras, and the Tertiary subdivided into the Paleogene and Neogene Periods. In 1978, the Paleogene was officially defined as the Paleocene, Eocene, and Oligocene Epochs; and the Neogene as the Miocene and Pliocene Epochs. In 1989, Tertiary and Quaternary were removed from the time scale due to the arbitrary nature of their boundary, but Quaternary was reinstated in 2009.
The term "Paleocene" from Ancient Greek παλαιός (palaiós), meaning "old", and καινός (kainós), meaning "new", specifically from "Eocene", and so means "the old part of the Eocene". The Eocene, in turn, is derived from Ancient Greek Ἠώς (Ēṓs), meaning "dawn", and καινός (kainós), meaning "new", as the epoch saw the dawn of recent, or modern, life. Paleocene did not come into broad usage until around 1920. In North America and mainland Europe, the standard spelling is "Paleocene", whereas it is "Palaeocene" in the UK. Geologist T. C. R. Pulvertaft has argued that the latter spelling is incorrect because this would imply either a translation of "old recent" or a derivation from "pala" and "Eocene", which would be incorrect because the prefix palæo- uses the ligature æ instead of "a" and "e" individually, so only both characters or neither should be dropped, not just one.
GeologyBoundaries
The Paleocene Epoch is the 10 million year time interval directly after the K–Pg extinction event, which ended the Cretaceous Period and the Mesozoic Era, and initiated the Cenozoic Era and the Paleogene Period. It is divided into three ages: the Danian spanning 66 to 61.6 Ma, the Selandian spanning 61.6 to 59.2 Ma, and the Thanetian spanning 59.2 to 56 Ma. It is succeeded by the Eocene.
The K–Pg boundary is clearly defined in the fossil record in numerous places around the world by a high-iridium band, as well as discontinuities with fossil flora and fauna. It is generally thought that a 10 to 15 km (6 to 9 mi) wide asteroid impact, forming the Chicxulub Crater in the Yucatán Peninsula in the Gulf of Mexico, and Deccan Trap volcanism caused a cataclysmic event at the boundary resulting in the extinction of 75% of all species.
The Paleocene ended with the Paleocene–Eocene thermal maximum, a short period of intense warming and ocean acidification brought about by the release of carbon en masse into the atmosphere and ocean systems, which led to a mass extinction of 30–50% of benthic foraminifera–planktonic species which are used as bioindicators of the health of a marine ecosystem—one of the largest in the Cenozoic. This event happened around 55.8 Ma, and was one of the most significant periods of global change during the Cenozoic.
Stratigraphy
Geologists divide the rocks of the Paleocene into a stratigraphic set of smaller rock units called stages, each formed during corresponding time intervals called ages. Stages can be defined globally or regionally. For global stratigraphic correlation, the ICS ratify global stages based on a Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) from a single formation (a stratotype) identifying the lower boundary of the stage. In 1989, the ICS decided to split the Paleocene into three stages: the Danian, Selandian, and Thanetian.
The Danian was first defined in 1847 by German-Swiss geologist Pierre Jean Édouard Desor based on the Danish chalks at Stevns Klint and Faxse, and was part of the Cretaceous, succeeded by the Tertiary Montian Stage. In 1982, after it was shown that the Danian and the Montian are the same, the ICS decided to define the Danian as starting with the K–Pg boundary, thus ending the practice of including the Danian in the Cretaceous. In 1991, the GSSP was defined as a well-preserved section in the El Haria Formation near El Kef, Tunisia, 36.1537°N 8.6486°E﻿ / 36.1537; 8.6486, and the proposal was officially published in 2006.

The Selandian and Thanetian are both defined in Itzurun beach by the Basque town of Zumaia, 43.3006°N 2.2594°W﻿ / 43.3006; -2.2594, as the area is a continuous early Santonian to early Eocene sea cliff outcrop. The Paleocene section is an essentially complete, exposed record 165 m (541 ft) thick, mainly composed of alternating hemipelagic sediments deposited at a depth of about 1,000 m (3,300 ft). The Danian deposits are sequestered into the Aitzgorri Limestone Formation, and the Selandian and early Thanetian into the Itzurun Formation. The Itzurun Formation is divided into groups A and B corresponding to the two stages respectively. The two stages were ratified in 2008, and this area was chosen because of its completion, low risk of erosion, proximity to the original areas the stages were defined, accessibility, and the protected status of the area due to its geological significance.
The Selandian was first proposed by Danish geologist Alfred Rosenkrantz in 1924 based on a section of fossil-rich glauconitic marls overlain by gray clay which unconformably overlies Danian chalk and limestone. The area is now subdivided into the Æbelø Formation, Holmehus Formation, and the Østerrende Clay. The beginning of this stage was defined by the end of carbonate rock deposition from an open ocean environment in the North Sea region (which had been going on for the previous 40 million years). The Selandian deposits in this area are directly overlain by the Eocene Fur Formation—the Thanetian was not represented here—and this discontinuity in the deposition record is why the GSSP was moved to Zumaia. Today, the beginning of the Selandian is marked by the appearances of the nannofossils Fasciculithus tympaniformis, Neochiastozygus perfectus, and Chiasmolithus edentulus, though some foraminifera are used by various authors.
The Thanetian was first proposed by Swiss geologist Eugène Renevier, in 1873; he included the south England Thanet, Woolwich, and Reading formations. In 1880, French geologist Gustave Frédéric Dollfus narrowed the definition to just the Thanet Formation. The Thanetian begins a little after the mid-Paleocene biotic event—a short-lived climatic event caused by an increase in methane—recorded at Itzurun as a dark 1 m (3.3 ft) interval from a reduction of calcium carbonate. At Itzurun, it begins about 29 m (95 ft) above the base of the Selandian, and is marked by the first appearance of the algae Discoaster and a diversification of Heliolithus, though the best correlation is in terms of paleomagnetism. A chron is the occurrence of a geomagnetic reversal—when the North and South poles switch polarities. Chron 1 (C1n) is defined as modern day to about 780,000 years ago, and the n denotes "normal" as in the polarity of today, and an r "reverse" for the opposite polarity. The beginning of the Thanetian is best correlated with the C26r/C26n reversal.
Mineral and hydrocarbon deposits
Several economically important coal deposits formed during the Paleocene, such as the sub-bituminous Fort Union Formation in the Powder River Basin of Wyoming and Montana, which produces 43% of American coal; the Wilcox Group in Texas, the richest deposits of the Gulf Coastal Plain; and the Cerrejón mine in Colombia, the largest open-pit mine in the country. Paleocene coal has been mined extensively in Svalbard, Norway, since near the beginning of the 20th century, and late Paleocene and early Eocene coal is widely distributed across the Canadian Arctic Archipelago and northern Siberia. In the North Sea, Paleocene-derived natural gas reserves, when they were discovered, totaled approximately 2.23 trillion m3 (7.89 trillion ft3), and oil in place 13.54 billion barrels. Important phosphate deposits—predominantly of francolite—near Métlaoui, Tunisia were formed from the late Paleocene to the early Eocene.
Impact craters
Impact craters formed in the Paleocene include: the Connolly Basin crater in Western Australia less than 60 Ma, the Texan Marquez crater 58 Ma, the Greenlandic Hiawatha Glacier crater 58 Ma, and possibly the Jordan Jabel Waqf as Suwwan crater which dates to between 56 and 37 Ma. Vanadium-rich osbornite from the Isle of Skye, Scotland, dating to 60 mya may be impact ejecta. Craters were also formed near the K–Pg boundary, the largest the Mexican Chicxulub crater whose impact was a major precipitator of the K–Pg extinction, and also the Ukrainian Boltysh crater, dated to 65.4 Ma the Canadian Eagle Butte crater (though it may be younger), the Vista Alegre crater (though this may date to about 115 Ma). Silicate glass spherules along the Atlantic coast of the U.S. indicate a meteor impact in the region at the PETM.
PaleogeographyPaleotectonics
During the Paleocene, the continents continued to drift toward their present positions. In the Northern Hemisphere, the former components of Laurasia (North America and Eurasia) were, at times, connected via land bridges: Beringia (at 65.5 and 58 Ma) between North America and East Asia, the De Geer route (from 71 to 63 Ma) between Greenland and Scandinavia, the Thulean route (at 57 and 55.8 Ma) between North America and Western Europe via Greenland, and the Turgai route connecting Europe with Asia (which were otherwise separated by the Turgai Strait at this time).
The Laramide orogeny, which began in the Late Cretaceous, continued to uplift the Rocky Mountains; it ended at the end of the Paleocene. Because of this and a drop in sea levels resulting from tectonic activity, the Western Interior Seaway, which had divided the continent of North America for much of the Cretaceous, had receded.
Between about 60.5 and 54.5 Ma, there was heightened volcanic activity in the North Atlantic region—the third largest magmatic event in the last 150 million years—creating the North Atlantic Igneous Province. The proto-Iceland hotspot is sometimes cited as being responsible for the initial volcanism, though rifting and resulting volcanism have also contributed. This volcanism may have contributed to the opening of the North Atlantic Ocean and seafloor spreading, the divergence of the Greenland Plate from the North American Plate, and, climatically, the PETM by dissociating methane clathrate crystals on the seafloor resulting in the mass release of carbon.
North and South America remained separated by the Central American Seaway, though an island arc (the South Central American Arc) had already formed about 73 Ma. The Caribbean Large Igneous Province (now the Caribbean Plate), which had formed from the Galápagos hotspot in the Pacific in the latest Cretaceous, was moving eastward as the North American and South American plates were getting pushed in the opposite direction due to the opening of the Atlantic (strike-slip tectonics). This motion would eventually uplift the Isthmus of Panama by 2.6 Ma. The Caribbean Plate continued moving until about 50 Ma when it reached its current position.

The components of the former southern supercontinent Gondwanaland in the Southern Hemisphere continued to drift apart, but Antarctica was still connected to South America and Australia. Africa was heading north towards Europe, and the Indian subcontinent towards Asia, which would eventually close the Tethys Ocean. The Indian and Eurasian Plates began colliding in the Paleocene, with uplift (and a land connection) beginning in the Miocene about 24–17 Ma. There is evidence that some plants and animals could migrate between India and Asia during the Paleocene, possibly via intermediary island arcs.
Paleoceanography
In the modern thermohaline circulation, warm tropical water becomes colder and saltier at the poles and sinks (downwelling or deep water formation) that occurs at the North Atlantic near the North Pole and the Southern Ocean near the Antarctic Peninsula. In the Paleocene, the waterways between the Arctic Ocean and the North Atlantic were somewhat restricted, so North Atlantic Deep Water (NADW) and the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC)—which circulates cold water from the Arctic towards the equator—had not yet formed, and so deep water formation probably did not occur in the North Atlantic. The Arctic and Atlantic would not be connected by sufficiently deep waters until the early to middle Eocene.
There is evidence of deep water formation in the North Pacific to at least a depth of about 2,900 m (9,500 ft). The elevated global deep water temperatures in the Paleocene may have been too warm for thermohaline circulation to be predominately heat driven. It is possible that the greenhouse climate shifted precipitation patterns, such that the Southern Hemisphere was wetter than the Northern, or the Southern experienced less evaporation than the Northern. In either case, this would have made the Northern more saline than the Southern, creating a density difference and a downwelling in the North Pacific traveling southward. Deep water formation may have also occurred in the South Atlantic.
It is largely unknown how global currents could have affected global temperature. The formation of the Northern Component Waters by Greenland in the Eocene—the predecessor of the AMOC—may have caused an intense warming in the North Hemisphere and cooling in the Southern, as well as an increase in deep water temperatures. In the PETM, it is possible deep water formation occurred in saltier tropical waters and moved polewards, which would increase global surface temperatures by warming the poles. Also, Antarctica was still connected to South America and Australia, and, because of this, the Antarctic Circumpolar Current—which traps cold water around the continent and prevents warm equatorial water from entering—had not yet formed. Its formation may have been related in the freezing of the continent. Warm coastal upwellings at the poles would have inhibited permanent ice cover. Conversely, it is possible deep water circulation was not a major contributor to the greenhouse climate, and deep water temperatures more likely change as a response to global temperature change rather than affecting it.
In the Arctic, coastal upwelling may have been largely temperature and wind-driven. In summer, the land surface temperature was probably higher than oceanic temperature, and the opposite was true in the winter, which is consistent with monsoon seasons in Asia. Open-ocean upwelling may have also been possible.
ClimateAverage climate
The Paleocene climate was, much like in the Cretaceous, tropical or subtropical, and the poles were temperate, with an average global temperature of roughly 24–25 °C (75–77 °F). For comparison, the average global temperature for the period between 1951 and 1980 was 14 °C (57 °F). The latitudinal temperature gradient was approximately 0.24 °C per degree of latitude. The poles also lacked ice caps, though some alpine glaciation did occur in the Transantarctic Mountains.
The poles probably had a cool temperate climate; northern Antarctica, Australia, the southern tip of South America, what is now the US and Canada, eastern Siberia, and Europe warm temperate; middle South America, southern and northern Africa, South India, Middle America, and China arid; and northern South America, central Africa, North India, middle Siberia, and what is now the Mediterranean Sea tropical. South-central North America had a humid, monsoonal climate along its coastal plain, but conditions were drier to the west and at higher altitudes. Svalbard was temperate, having a mean temperature of 19.2 ± 2.49 °C during its warmest month and 1.7 ± 3.24 °С during its coldest.
Global deep water temperatures in the Paleocene likely ranged from 8–12 °C (46–54 °F), compared to 0–3 °C (32–37 °F) in modern day. Based on the upper limit, average sea surface temperatures (SSTs) at 60°N and S would have been the same as deep sea temperatures, at 30°N and S about 23 °C (73 °F), and at the equator about 28 °C (82 °F). In the Danish Palaeocene sea, SSTs were cooler than those of the preceding Late Cretaceous and the succeeding Eocene. The Paleocene foraminifera assemblage globally indicates a defined deep-water thermocline (a warmer mass of water closer to the surface sitting on top of a colder mass nearer the bottom) persisting throughout the epoch. The Atlantic foraminifera indicate a general warming of sea surface temperature–with tropical taxa present in higher latitude areas–until the Late Paleocene when the thermocline became steeper and tropical foraminifera retreated back to lower latitudes.
Early Paleocene atmospheric CO2 levels at what is now Castle Rock, Colorado, were calculated to be between 352 and 1,110 parts per million (ppm), with a median of 616 ppm. Based on this and estimated plant-gas exchange rates and global surface temperatures, the climate sensitivity was calculated to be +3 °C when CO2 levels doubled, compared to 7 °C following the formation of ice at the poles. CO2 levels alone may have been insufficient in maintaining the greenhouse climate, and some positive feedbacks must have been active, such as some combination of cloud, aerosol, or vegetation related processes. A 2019 study identified changes in orbital eccentricity as the dominant drivers of climate between the late Cretaceous and the early Eocene.
Climatic events
The effects of the meteor impact and volcanism 66 Ma and the climate across the K–Pg boundary were likely fleeting, and climate reverted to normal in a short time frame. The freezing temperatures probably reversed after three years and returned to normal within decades, sulfuric acid aerosols causing acid rain probably dissipated after 10 years, and dust from the impact blocking out sunlight and inhibiting photosynthesis would have lasted up to a year though potential global wildfires raging for several years would have released more particulates into the atmosphere. For the following half million years, the carbon isotope gradient—a difference in the 13C/12C ratio between surface and deep ocean water, causing carbon to cycle into the deep sea—may have shut down. This, termed a "Strangelove ocean", indicates low oceanic productivity; resultant decreased phytoplankton activity may have led to a reduction in cloud seeds and, thus, marine cloud brightening, causing global temperatures to increase by 6 °C (CLAW hypothesis). Following the extreme disruptions in the aftermath of the K-Pg extinction event, the relatively cool, though still greenhouse, conditions of the Late Cretaceous–Early Palaeogene Cool Interval (LKEPCI) that began in the Late Cretaceous continued.
The Dan–C2 Event 65.2 Ma in the early Danian spanned about 100,000 years, and was characterized by an increase in carbon, particularly in the deep sea. Since the mid-Maastrichtian, more and more carbon had been sequestered in the deep sea possibly due to a global cooling trend and increased circulation into the deep sea. The Dan–C2 event may represent a release of this carbon after deep sea temperatures rose to a certain threshold, as warmer water can dissolve less carbon. Alternatively, the cause of the Dan-C2 event may have been a pulse of Deccan Traps volcanism. Savanna may have temporarily displaced forestland in this interval.
Around 62.2 Ma in the late Danian, there was a warming event and evidence of ocean acidification associated with an increase in carbon; at this time, there was major seafloor spreading in the Atlantic and volcanic activity along the southeast margin of Greenland. The Latest Danian Event, also known as the Top Chron C27n Event, lasted about 200,000 years and resulted in a 1.6–2.8 °C increase in temperatures throughout the water column. Though the temperature in the latest Danian varied at about the same magnitude, this event coincides with an increase of carbon.
About 60.5 Ma at the Danian/Selandian boundary, there is evidence of anoxia spreading out into coastal waters, and a drop in sea levels which is most likely explained as an increase in temperature and evaporation, as there was no ice at the poles to lock up water.
During the mid-Palaeocene biotic event (MPBE), also known as the Early Late Palaeocene Event (ELPE), around 59 Ma (roughly 50,000 years before the Selandian/Thanetian boundary), the temperature spiked probably due to a mass release of the deep sea methane hydrate into the atmosphere and ocean systems. Carbon was probably output for 10–11,000 years, and the aftereffects likely subsided around 52–53,000 years later. There is also evidence this occurred again 300,000 years later in the early Thanetian dubbed MPBE-2. Respectively, about 83 and 132 gigatons of methane-derived carbon were ejected into the atmosphere, which suggests a 2–3 °C (3.6–5.4 °F) rise in temperature, and likely caused heightened seasonality and less stable environmental conditions. It may have also caused an increase of grass in some areas.
From 59.7 to 58.1 Ma, during the late Selandian and early Thanetian, organic carbon burial resulted in a period of climatic cooling, sea level fall and transient ice growth. This interval saw the highest δ18O values of the epoch.
Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum
The Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum was an approximately 200,000-year-long event where the global average temperature rose by some 5 to 8 °C (9 to 14 °F), and mid-latitude and polar areas may have exceeded modern tropical temperatures of 24–29 °C (75–84 °F). This was due to an ejection of 2,500–4,500 gigatons of carbon into the atmosphere, most commonly explained as the perturbation and release of methane clathrate deposits in the North Atlantic from tectonic activity and resultant increase in bottom water temperatures. Other proposed hypotheses include methane release from the heating of organic matter at the seafloor rather than methane clathrates, or melting permafrost.
The duration of carbon output is controversial, but most likely about 2,500 years. This carbon also interfered with the carbon cycle and caused ocean acidification, and potentially altered and slowed down ocean currents, the latter leading to the expansion of oxygen minimum zones (OMZs) in the deep sea. In surface water, OMZs could have also been caused from the formation of strong thermoclines preventing oxygen inflow, and higher temperatures equated to higher productivity leading to higher oxygen usurpation. Further, expanding OMZs could have caused the proliferation of sulfate-reducing microorganisms which create highly toxic hydrogen sulfide H2S as a waste product. During the event, the volume of sulfidic water may have been 10–20% of total ocean volume, in comparison to today's 1%. This may have also caused chemocline upwellings along continents and the dispersal of H2S into the atmosphere. During the PETM there was a temporary dwarfing of mammals apparently caused by the upward excursion in temperature.
Flora
The warm, wet climate supported tropical and subtropical forests worldwide, mainly populated by conifers and broad-leafed trees. In Patagonia, the landscape supported tropical rainforests, cloud rainforests, mangrove forests, swamp forests, savannas, and sclerophyllous forests. In the Colombian Cerrejón Formation, fossil flora belong to the same families as modern day flora—such as palm trees, legumes, aroids, and malvales—and the same is true in the North Dakotan Almont/Beicegel Creek—such as Ochnaceae, Cyclocarya, and Ginkgo cranei—indicating the same floral families have characterized South American rainforests and the American Western Interior since the Paleocene.

The extinction of large herbivorous dinosaurs may have allowed the forests to grow quite dense, and there is little evidence of wide open plains. Plants evolved several techniques to cope with high plant density, such as buttressing to better absorb nutrients and compete with other plants, increased height to reach sunlight, larger diaspore in seeds to provide added nutrition on the dark forest floor, and epiphytism where a plant grows on another plant in response to less space on the forest floor. Despite increasing density—which could act as fuel—wildfires decreased in frequency from the Cretaceous to the early Eocene as the atmospheric oxygen levels decreased to modern day levels, though they may have been more intense.
Recovery
There was a major die-off of plant species over the boundary; for example, in the Williston Basin of North Dakota, an estimated 1/3 to 3/5 of plant species went extinct. The K–Pg extinction event ushered in a floral turnover; for example, the once commonplace Araucariaceae conifers were almost fully replaced by Podocarpaceae conifers, and the Cheirolepidiaceae, a group of conifers that had dominated during most of the Mesozoic but had become rare during the Late Cretaceous became dominant trees in Patagonia, before going extinct. Some plant communities, such as those in eastern North America, were already experiencing an extinction event in the late Maastrichtian, particularly in the 1 million years before the K–Pg extinction event. The "disaster plants" that refilled the emptied landscape crowded out many Cretaceous plants, and resultantly, many went extinct by the middle Paleocene.

The strata immediately overlaying the K–Pg extinction event are especially rich in fern fossils. Ferns are often the first species to colonize areas damaged by forest fires, so this "fern spike" may mark the recovery of the biosphere following the impact (which caused blazing fires worldwide). The diversifying herb flora of the early Paleocene either represent pioneer species which re-colonized the recently emptied landscape, or a response to the increased amount of shade provided in a forested landscape. Lycopods, ferns, and angiosperm shrubs may have been important components of the Paleocene understory.
In general, the forests of the Paleocene were species-poor, and diversity did not fully recover until the end of the Paleocene. For example, the floral diversity of what is now the Holarctic region (comprising most of the Northern Hemisphere) was mainly early members of Ginkgo, Metasequoia, Glyptostrobus, Macginitiea, Platanus, Carya, Ampelopsis, and Cercidiphyllum. Patterns in plant recovery varied significantly with latitude, climate, and altitude. For example, what is now Castle Rock, Colorado featured a rich rainforest only 1.4 million years after the event, probably due to a rain shadow effect causing regular monsoon seasons. Conversely, low plant diversity and a lack of specialization in insects in the Colombian Cerrejón Formation, dated to 58 mya, indicates the ecosystem was still recovering from the K–Pg extinction event 7 million years later.
Angiosperms
Flowering plants (angiosperms), which had become dominant among forest taxa by the middle Cretaceous 110–90 Ma, continued to develop and proliferate, more so to take advantage of the recently emptied niches and an increase in rainfall. Along with them coevolved the insects that fed on these plants and pollinated them. Predation by insects was especially high during the PETM. Many fruit-bearing plants appeared in the Paleocene in particular, probably to take advantage of the newly evolving birds and mammals for seed dispersal.
In what is now the Gulf Coast, angiosperm diversity increased slowly in the early Paleocene, and more rapidly in the middle and late Paleocene. This may have been because the effects of the K–Pg extinction event were still to some extent felt in the early Paleocene, the early Paleocene may not have had as many open niches, early angiosperms may not have been able to evolve at such an accelerated rate as later angiosperms, low diversity equates to lower evolution rates, or there was not much angiosperm migration into the region in the early Paleocene. Over the K–Pg extinction event, angiosperms had a higher extinction rate than gymnosperms (which include conifers, cycads, and relatives) and pteridophytes (ferns, horsetails, and relatives); zoophilous angiosperms (those that relied on animals for pollination) had a higher rate than anemophilous angiosperms; and evergreen angiosperms had a higher rate than deciduous angiosperms as deciduous plants can become dormant in harsh conditions.
In the Gulf Coast, angiosperms experienced another extinction event during the PETM, which they recovered quickly from in the Eocene through immigration from the Caribbean and Europe. During this time, the climate became warmer and wetter, and it is possible that angiosperms evolved to become stenotopic by this time, able to inhabit a narrow range of temperature and moisture; or, since the dominant floral ecosystem was a highly integrated and complex closed-canopy rainforest by the middle Paleocene, the plant ecosystems were more vulnerable to climate change. There is some evidence that, in the Gulf Coast, there was an extinction event in the late Paleocene preceding the PETM, which may have been due to the aforementioned vulnerability of complex rainforests, and the ecosystem may have been disrupted by only a small change in climate.
Polar forests
The warm Paleocene climate, much like that of the Cretaceous, allowed for diverse polar forests. Whereas precipitation is a major factor in plant diversity nearer the equator, polar plants had to adapt to varying light availability (polar nights and midnight suns) and temperatures. Because of this, plants from both poles independently evolved some similar characteristics, such as broad leaves. Plant diversity at both poles increased throughout the Paleocene, especially at the end, in tandem with the increasing global temperature.
At the North Pole, woody angiosperms had become the dominant plants, a reversal from the Cretaceous where herbs proliferated. The Iceberg Bay Formation on Ellesmere Island, Nunavut (latitude 75–80° N) shows remains of a late Paleocene dawn redwood forest, the canopy reaching around 32 m (105 ft), and a climate similar to the Pacific Northwest. On the Alaska North Slope, Metasequoia was the dominant conifer. Much of the diversity represented migrants from nearer the equator. Deciduousness was dominant, probably to conserve energy by retroactively shedding leaves and retaining some energy rather than having them die from frostbite. In south-central Alaska, the Chickaloon Formation preserves peat-forming swamps dominated by taxodiaceous conifers and clastic floodplains occupied by angiosperm–conifer forests.
At the South Pole, due to the increasing isolation of Antarctica, many plant taxa were endemic to the continent instead of migrating down. Patagonian flora may have originated in Antarctica. The climate was much cooler than in the Late Cretaceous, though frost probably was not common in at least coastal areas. East Antarctica was likely warm and humid. Because of this, evergreen forests could proliferate as, in the absence of frost and a low probability of leaves dying, it was more energy efficient to retain leaves than to regrow them every year. One possibility is that the interior of the continent favored deciduous trees, though prevailing continental climates may have produced winters warm enough to support evergreen forests. As in the Cretaceous, podocarpaceous conifers, Nothofagus, and Proteaceae angiosperms were common.
Fauna
In the K–Pg extinction event, every land animal over 25 kg (55 lb) was wiped out, leaving open several niches at the beginning of the epoch.
Mammals
Mammals had first appeared in the Late Triassic, and remained small and nocturnal throughout the Mesozoic to avoid competition with dinosaurs (nocturnal bottleneck), though, by the Middle Jurassic, they had branched out into several habitats—such as subterranean, arboreal, and aquatic— and the largest known Mesozoic mammal, Repenomamus robustus reached about 1 m (3 ft 3 in) in length and 12–14 kg (26–31 lb) in weight–comparable to the modern day Virginia opossum. Though some mammals could sporadically venture out in daytime (cathemerality) by roughly 10 million years before the K–Pg extinction event, they only became strictly diurnal (active in the daytime) sometime after.
In general, Paleocene mammals retained this small size until near the end of the epoch, and, consequently, early mammal bones are not well preserved in the fossil record, and most of what is known comes from fossil teeth. Multituberculates, a now-extinct rodent-like group not closely related to any modern mammal, were the most successful group of mammals in the Mesozoic, and they reached peak diversity in the early Paleocene. During this time, multituberculate taxa had a wide range of dental complexity, which correlates to a broader range in diet for the group as a whole. Multituberculates declined in the late Paleocene and went extinct at the end of the Eocene, possibly due to competition from newly evolving rodents.

Nonetheless, following the K–Pg extinction event, mammals very quickly diversified and filled the empty niches. Mammal richness during this epoch, in contrast to the present day, varied insignificantly with latitude. Modern mammals are subdivided into therians (modern members are placentals and marsupials) and monotremes. These three groups all originated in the Cretaceous. Paleocene marsupials include Peradectes, and monotremes Monotrematum. The epoch featured the rise of many crown placental groups—groups that have living members in modern day—such as the earliest afrotherian Ocepeia, xenarthran Utaetus, rodent Tribosphenomys and Paramys, the forerunners of primates the Plesiadapiformes, earliest carnivorans Ravenictis and Pristinictis, possible pangolins Palaeanodonta, possible forerunners of odd-toed ungulates Phenacodontidae, and eulipotyphlans Nyctitheriidae. Though therian mammals had probably already begun to diversify around 10 to 20 million years before the K–Pg extinction event, average mammal size increased greatly after the boundary, and a radiation into frugivory (fruit-eating) and omnivory began, namely with the newly evolving large herbivores such as the Taeniodonta, Tillodonta, Pantodonta, Polydolopimorphia, and the Dinocerata. Large carnivores include the wolf-like Mesonychia, such as Ankalagon and Sinonyx.
Though there was an explosive diversification, the affinities of most Paleocene mammals are unknown, and only primates, carnivorans, and rodents have unambiguous Paleocene origins, resulting in a 10 million year gap in the fossil record of other mammalian crown orders. The most species-rich order of Paleocene mammals is Condylarthra, which is a wastebasket taxon for miscellaneous bunodont hoofed mammals. Other ambiguous orders include the Leptictida, Cimolesta, and Creodonta. This uncertainty blurs the early evolution of placentals.
Land mammal ages
Cenozoic mammal faunas are often described using biochronological or biostratigraphic systems, which arrange rock strata or intervals of time based on distinctive fossil assemblages or the evolution of new mammal species. Apart from Australia and Antarctica (which lack Paleocene mammal fossils), each continent has a unique series of Cenozoic land mammal ages (LMAs) overprinted on the global geological time scale. These different land mammal ages are listed in the following table, which shows rough correlations to each other and the three global ages/stages of the Paleocene:
Birds
According to DNA studies, modern birds (Neornithes) rapidly diversified following the extinction of the other dinosaurs in the Paleocene, and nearly all modern bird lineages can trace their origins to this epoch with the exception of fowl and palaeognaths. This was one of the fastest diversifications of any group, probably fueled by the diversification of fruit-bearing trees and associated insects, and the modern bird groups had likely already diverged within four million years of the K–Pg extinction event. However, the fossil record of birds in the Paleocene is rather poor compared to other groups, limited globally to mainly waterbirds such as the early penguin Waimanu. The earliest arboreal crown group bird known is Tsidiiyazhi, a mousebird dating to around 62 Ma. The fossil record also includes early owls such as the large Berruornis from France, and the smaller Ogygoptynx from the United States.
Almost all archaic birds (any bird outside Neornithes) went extinct during the K–Pg extinction event, although the archaic Qinornis is recorded in the Paleocene. Their extinction may have led to the proliferation of neornithine birds in the Paleocene, and the only known Cretaceous neornithine birds are the waterbird Vegavis, the fowl relative Asteriornis, and possibly also the waterbird Teviornis.
In the Mesozoic, birds and pterosaurs exhibited size-related niche partitioning – no known Late Cretaceous flying bird had a wingspan greater than 2 m (6 ft 7 in) nor exceeded a weight of 5 kg (11 lb), whereas contemporary pterosaurs ranged from 2–10 m (6 ft 7 in – 32 ft 10 in), probably to avoid competition. Their extinction allowed flying birds to attain greater size, such as pelagornithids and pelecaniformes. The Paleocene pelagornithid Protodontopteryx was quite small compared to later members, with a wingspan of about 1 m (3.3 ft), comparable to a gull. On the archipelago-continent of Europe, the flightless bird Gastornis was the largest herbivore at 2 m (6 ft 7 in) tall for the largest species, possibly due to lack of competition from newly emerging large mammalian herbivores which were prevalent on the other continents. The carnivorous terror birds in South America have a contentious appearance in the Paleocene with Paleopsilopterus, though the first definitive appearance is in the Eocene.
Reptiles
It is generally believed all non-avian dinosaurs went extinct at the K–Pg extinction event 66 Ma, though there are a couple of controversial claims of Paleocene dinosaurs which would indicate a gradual decline of dinosaurs. Contentious dates include remains from the Hell Creek Formation dated 40,000 years after the boundary, and a hadrosaur femur from the San Juan Basin dated to 64.5 Ma, but such stray late forms may be zombie taxa that were washed out and moved to younger sediments.
In the wake of the K–Pg extinction event, 83% of lizard and snake (squamate) species went extinct, and the diversity did not fully recover until the end of the Paleocene. However, since the only major squamate lineages to disappear in the event were the mosasaurs and polyglyphanodontians (the latter making up 40% of Maastrichtian lizard diversity), and most major squamate groups had evolved by the Cretaceous, the event probably did not greatly affect squamate evolution, and newly evolving squamates did not seemingly branch out into new niches as mammals. That is, Cretaceous and Paleogene squamates filled the same niches. Nonetheless, there was a faunal turnover of squamates, and groups that were dominant by the Eocene were not as abundant in the Cretaceous, namely the anguids, iguanas, night lizards, pythons, colubrids, boas, and worm lizards. Only small squamates are known from the early Paleocene—the largest snake Helagras was 95 cm (37 in) in length—but the late Paleocene snake Titanoboa grew to over 13 m (43 ft) long, the longest snake ever recorded. Kawasphenodon peligrensis from the early Paleocene of South America represents the youngest record of Rhynchocephalia outside of New Zealand, where the only extant representative of the order, the tuatara, resides.
Freshwater crocodilians and choristoderans were among the aquatic reptiles to have survived the K–Pg extinction event, probably because freshwater environments were not as impacted as marine ones. One example of a Paleocene crocodile is Borealosuchus, which averaged 3.7 m (12 ft) in length at the Wannagan Creek site. Among crocodyliformes, the aquatic and terrestrial dyrosaurs and the fully terrestrial sebecids would also survive the K-Pg extinction event, and a late surviving member of Pholidosauridae is also known from the Danian of Morocco. Three choristoderans are known from the Paleocene: The gharial-like neochoristoderans Champsosaurus—the largest is the Paleocene C. gigas at 3 m (9.8 ft), Simoedosaurus—the largest specimen measuring 5 m (16 ft), and an indeterminate species of the lizard like non-neochoristoderan Lazarussuchus around 44 centimetres in length. The last known choristoderes, belonging to the genus Lazarussuchus, are known from the Miocene.
Turtles experienced a decline in the Campanian (Late Cretaceous) during a cooling event, and recovered during the PETM at the end of the Paleocene. Turtles were not greatly affected by the K–Pg extinction event, and around 80% of species survived. In Colombia, a 60 million year old turtle with a 1.7 m (5 ft 7 in) carapace, Carbonemys, was discovered.
Amphibians
There is little evidence amphibians were affected very much by the K–Pg extinction event, probably because the freshwater habitats they inhabited were not as greatly impacted as marine environments. In the Hell Creek Formation of eastern Montana, a 1990 study found no extinction in amphibian species across the boundary. The true toads evolved during the Paleocene. The final record of albanerpetontids from North America and outside of Europe and Anatolia, an unnamed species of Albanerpeton, is known from the Paleocene aged Paskapoo Formation in Canada.
Fish
The small pelagic fish population recovered rather quickly, and there was a low extinction rate for sharks and rays. Overall, only 12% of fish species went extinct. During the Cretaceous, fishes were not very abundant, probably due to heightened predation by or competition with ammonites and squid, although large predatory fish did exist, including ichthyodectids, pachycormids and pachyrhizodontids. Almost immediately following the K–Pg extinction event, ray-finned fish — today, representing nearly half of all vertebrate taxa – became much more numerous and increased in size, and rose to dominate the open-oceans. Acanthomorphs—a group of ray-finned fish which, today, represent a third of all vertebrate life—experienced a massive diversification following the K–Pg extinction event, dominating marine ecosystems by the end of the Paleocene, refilling vacant, open-ocean predatory niches as well as spreading out into recovering reef systems. In specific, percomorphs diversified faster than any other vertebrate group at the time, with the exception of birds; Cretaceous percomorphs varied very little in body plan, whereas, by the Eocene, percomorphs evolved into vastly varying creatures such as early scombrids (today, tuna, mackerels, and bonitos), barracudas, jacks, billfish, flatfishes, and aulostomoid (trumpetfish and cornetfish). However, the discovery of the Cretaceous cusk eel Pastorius shows that the body plans of at least some percomorphs were already highly variable, perhaps indicating an already diverse array of percomorph body plans before the Paleocene.

Conversely, sharks and rays appear to have been unable to exploit the vacant niches, and recovered the same pre-extinction abundance. There was a faunal turnover of sharks from mackerel sharks to ground sharks, as ground sharks are more suited to hunting the rapidly diversifying ray-finned fish whereas mackerel sharks target larger prey. The first megatoothed shark, Otodus obliquus—the ancestor of the giant megalodon—is recorded from the Paleocene.
Several Paleocene freshwater fish are recorded from North America, including bowfins, gars, arowanas, Gonorynchidae, common catfish, smelts, and pike.
Insects and arachnids
Insect recovery varied from place to place. For example, it may have taken until the PETM for insect diversity to recover in the western interior of North America, whereas Patagonian insect diversity had recovered by four million years after the K–Pg extinction event. In some areas, such as the Bighorn Basin in Wyoming, there is a dramatic increase in plant predation during the PETM, although this is probably not indicative of a diversification event in insects due to rising temperatures because plant predation decreases following the PETM. More likely, insects followed their host plant or plants which were expanding into mid-latitude regions during the PETM, and then retreated afterward.
The middle-to-late Paleocene French Menat Formation shows an abundance of beetles (making up 77.5% of the insect diversity)—especially weevils (50% of diversity), jewel beetles, leaf beetles, and reticulated beetles—as well as other true bugs—such as pond skaters—and cockroaches. To a lesser degree, there are also orthopterans, hymenopterans, butterflies, and flies, though planthoppers were more common than flies. Representing less than 1% of fossil remains dragonflies, caddisflies, mayflies, earwigs, mantises, net-winged insects, and possibly termites.
The Wyoming Hanna Formation is the only known Paleocene formation to produce sizable pieces of amber, as opposed to only small droplets. The amber was formed by a single or a closely related group of either taxodiaceaen or pine tree(s) which produced cones similar to those of dammaras. Only one insect, a thrips, has been identified.

There is a gap in the ant fossil record from 78 to 55 Ma, except for the aneuretine Napakimyrma paskapooensis from the 62–56 Ma Canadian Paskapoo Formation. Given high abundance in the Eocene, two of the modern dominant ant subfamilies—Ponerinae and Myrmicinae—likely originated and greatly diversified in the Paleocene, acting as major hunters of arthropods, and probably competed with each other for food and nesting grounds in the dense angiosperm leaf litter. Myrmicines expanded their diets to seeds and formed trophobiotic symbiotic relationships with aphids, mealybugs, treehoppers, and other honeydew secreting insects which were also successful in angiosperm forests, allowing them to invade other biomes, such as the canopy or temperate environments, and achieve a worldwide distribution by the middle Eocene.
About 80% of the butterfly and moth (lepidopteran) fossil record occurs in the early Paleogene, specifically the late Paleocene and the middle-to-late Eocene. Most Paleocene lepidopteran compression fossils come from the Danish Fur Formation. Though there is low family-level diversity in the Paleocene compared to later epochs, this may be due to a largely incomplete fossil record. The evolution of bats had a profound effect on lepidopterans, which feature several anti-predator adaptations such as echolocation jamming and the ability to detect bat signals.
Bees were likely heavily impacted by the K–Pg extinction event and a die-off of flowering plants, though the bee fossil record is very limited. The oldest kleptoparasitic bee, Paleoepeolus, is known from the Paleocene 60 Ma.
Though the Eocene features, by far, the highest proportion of known fossil spider species, the Paleocene spider assemblage is quite low. Some spider groups began to diversify around the PETM, such as jumping spiders, and possibly coelotine spiders (members of the funnel weaver family).
The diversification of mammals had a profound effect on parasitic insects, namely the evolution of bats, which have more ectoparasites than any other known mammal or bird. The PETM's effect on mammals greatly impacted the evolution of fleas, ticks, and oestroids.
Marine invertebrates
Among marine invertebrates, plankton and those with a planktonic stage in their development (meroplankton) were most impacted by the K–Pg extinction event, and plankton populations crashed. Nearly 90% of all calcifying plankton species perished. This reverberated up and caused a global marine food chain collapse, namely with the extinction of ammonites and large raptorial marine reptiles. Nonetheless, the rapid diversification of large fish species indicates a healthy plankton population through the Paleocene.
Marine invertebrate diversity may have taken about 7 million years to recover, though this may be a preservation artifact as anything smaller than 5 mm (0.20 in) is unlikely to be fossilized, and body size may have simply decreased across the boundary. A 2019 study found that in Seymour Island, Antarctica, the marine life assemblage consisted primarily of burrowing creatures—such as burrowing clams and snails—for around 320,000 years after the K–Pg extinction event, and it took around a million years for the marine diversity to return to previous levels. Areas closer to the equator may have been more affected. Sand dollars first evolved in the late Paleocene. The Late Cretaceous decapod crustacean assemblage of James Ross Island appears to have been mainly pioneer species and the ancestors of modern fauna, such as the first Antarctic crabs and the first appearance of the lobsters of the genera Linuparus, Metanephrops, and Munidopsis which still inhabit Antarctica today.
In the Cretaceous, the main reef-building creatures were the box-like bivalve rudists instead of coral—though a diverse Cretaceous coral assemblage did exist—and rudists had collapsed by the time of the K–Pg extinction event. Some corals are known to have survived in higher latitudes in the Late Cretaceous and into the Paleogene, and hard coral-dominated reefs may have recovered by 8 million years after the K–Pg extinction event, though the coral fossil record of this time is rather sparse. Though there was a lack of extensive coral reefs in the Paleocene, there were some colonies—mainly dominated by zooxanthellate corals—in shallow coastal (neritic) areas. Starting in the latest Cretaceous and continuing until the early Eocene, calcareous corals rapidly diversified. Corals probably competed mainly with red and coralline algae for space on the seafloor. Calcified dasycladalean green algae experienced the greatest diversity in their evolutionary history in the Paleocene. Though coral reef ecosystems do not become particularly abundant in the fossil record until the Miocene (possibly due to preservation bias), strong Paleocene coral reefs have been identified in what are now the Pyrenees (emerging as early as 63 Ma), with some smaller Paleocene coral reefs identified across the Mediterranean region.


This list includes the mammal species found in the Indian state of Telangana. There are 62 mammal species in Telangana.
Artiodactyla
Blackbuck, Antilope cervicapra
Chital, Axis axis
Gaur, Bos gaurus
Zebu, Bos indicus
Domestic cow, Bos taurus
Nilgai, Boselaphus tragocamelus
Domestic water buffalo, Bubalus bubalis
Dromedary camel, Camelus dromedarius
Domestic goat, Capra hircus
Chinkara, Gazella bennettii
Indian spotted chevrotain, Moschiola indica
Northern red muntjac, Muntiacus vaginalis
Sambar, Rusa unicolor
Wild boar, Sus sucrofa
Four-horned antelope, Tetracerus quadricornis
Carnivora
Golden jackal, Canis aureus
Domestic dog, Canis familiaris
Dhole, Cuon alpinus
Domestic cat, Felis catus
Jungle cat, Felis chaus
Sloth bear, Melursus ursinus
Leopard, Panthera pardus
Tiger, Panthera tigris
Asian palm civet, Paradoxurus hermaphroditus
Indian grey mongoose, Urva edwarsii
Ruddy mongoose, Urva smithii
Bengal fox, Vulpes bengalensis
Chiroptera
Greater short-nosed fruit bat, Cynopterus sphinx
Fulvus roundleaf bat, Hipposideros fulvus
Indian roundleaf bat, Hipposideros lankadiva
Schneider's leaf-nosed bat, Hipposideros speoris
Greater false vampire bat, Lyroderma lyra
Wrinkle-lipped free-tailed bat, Mops plicatus
Round-eared tube-nosed bat, Murina cyclotis
Kelaart's pipistrelle, Pipistrellus ceylonicus
Indian flying fox, Pteropus giganteus
Lesser woolly horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus beddomei
Lesser mouse-tailed bat, Rhinopoma hardwickii
Leschenault's rousette, Rousettus leschenaultii
Lesser Asiatic yellow bat, Scotophilus kuhlii
Egyptian free-tailed bat, Tadarida aegyptiaca
Black-bearded tomb bat, Taphozous melanopogon
Naked-rumped tomb bat, Taphozous nudiventris
Eulipotyphla
Asian house shrew, Suncus murinus
Lagomorpha
Indian hare, Lepus nigricollis
Primates
Rhesus macaque, Macaca mulatta
Bonnet macaque, Macaca radiata
Northern plains gray langur, Semnopithecus entellus
Tufted gray langur, Semnopithecus priam
Rodentia
Lesser bandicoot rat, Bandicota bengalensis
Cutch rat, Cremnomys cutchicus
Northern palm squirrel, Funambulus pennantii
Indian palm squirrel, Funambulus palmarum
Indian crested porcupine, Hystrix indica
House mouse, Mus musculus
Phillips's mouse, Mus phillipsi
Rock-loving mouse, Mus saxicola
Earth-colored mouse, Mus terricolor
Brown rat, Rattus norvegicus
Black rat, Rattus rattus
Indian giant squirrel, Ratufa indica
Scandentia
Madras treeshrew, Anathana ellioti


A dolphinarium is an aquarium for dolphins. The dolphins are usually kept in a pool, though occasionally they may be kept in pens in the open sea, either for research or public performances. Some dolphinariums (sometimes called dolphinaria in plural) consist of one pool where dolphins perform for the public, others are part of larger parks, such as marine mammal parks, zoos or theme parks, with other animals and attractions as well.
While cetaceans have been held in captivity since the 1860s, the first commercial dolphinarium was opened only in 1938. Their popularity increased rapidly until the 1960s. Since the 1970s, increasing concern for animal welfare led to stricter regulation, which in several countries ultimately resulted in the closure of some dolphinariums. Despite this trend, dolphinariums are still widespread in Europe, Japan and North America. The most common species of dolphin kept in dolphinariums is the bottlenose dolphin, as it is relatively easy to train and has a long lifespan in captivity. While trade in dolphins is internationally regulated, other aspects of keeping dolphins in captivity, such as the minimum size and characteristics of pools, vary among countries. Though animal welfare is perceived to have improved significantly over the last few decades, many animal rights groups still consider keeping dolphins captive to be a form of animal abuse.
History
Though cetaceans have been held in captivity in both North America and Europe by 1860—Boston Aquarial Gardens in 1859 and pairs of beluga whales in Barnum's American Museum in New York City museum— dolphins were first kept for paid entertainment in the Marine Studios dolphinarium founded in 1938 in St. Augustine, Florida. It was here that it was discovered that dolphins could be trained to perform tricks. Recognizing the success of Marine Studios, more dolphinariums began keeping dolphins for entertainment. In the 1960s, keeping dolphins in zoos and aquariums for entertainment purposes increased in popularity after the 1963 Flipper movie and subsequent Flipper television series. In 1966, the first dolphin was exported to Europe. In these early days, dolphinariums could grow quickly due to a lack of legislation and lack of organised animal welfare.
New legislation, most notably the 1972 Marine Mammal Protection Act in the United States, combined with a more critical view on animal welfare, forced many dolphinariums around the world to close. A prominent example is the United Kingdom; in the early 1970s there were at least 36 dolphinariums and traveling dolphin shows, however, the last dolphinarium closed its doors in 1993. The last dolphinarium in Hungary was closed in 1992. In 2005 both Chile and Costa Rica prohibited keeping cetaceans captive. However, around 60 dolphinariums currently exist across Europe, of which 34 are within the EU. Japan, Mexico and the United States are also home to a relatively large number of dolphinariums.
Design
The water in the pools has to be constantly filtered to keep it clean for the dolphins and the temperature and composition of the water has to be controlled to match the conditions dolphins experience in the wild. In the absence of a common international regulation, guidelines regarding the minimum size of the pools vary between countries. To give an indication of pool sizes, the European Association for Aquatic Mammals recommends that a pool for five dolphins should have a surface area of 275 m2 (2,960 ft2) plus an additional 75 m2 (810 ft2) for every additional animal, have a depth of 3.5 m (11 ft) and have a water volume of at least 1,000 m3 (35,000 ft3) with an additional 200 m3 (7,100 ft3) for every additional animal. If two of these three conditions are met, and the third is not more than 10% below standard, the EAAM considers the pool size to be acceptable.
AnimalsSpecies
Various species of dolphins are kept in captivity as well as several other small whale species such as harbour porpoises, finless porpoises and belugas, though in those cases the word dolphinarium may not be fitting as these are not true dolphins. Bottlenose dolphins are the most common species of dolphins kept in dolphinariums as they are relatively easy to train, have a long lifespan in captivity and a friendly appearance. Hundreds if not thousands of bottlenose dolphins live in captivity across the world, though exact numbers are hard to determine. Orcas are well known for their performances in shows, but the number of orcas kept in captivity is very small, especially when compared to the number of bottlenose dolphins, with only 44 captive orcas being held in aquaria as of 2012.
The majority of orcas are located in the various SeaWorld parks in the United States. Other species kept in captivity are spotted dolphins, gray whales, false killer whales, pilot whales and common dolphins, Commerson's dolphins, as well as rough-toothed dolphins, but all in much lower numbers than the bottlenose dolphin. There are fewer than ten Amazon river dolphins, Risso's dolphins, or tucuxi in captivity. Two unusual and very rare hybrid dolphins (wolphins, a cross between the bottlenose dolphin and the false killer whale) are kept at the Sea Life Park in Hawaii. Also two common/bottlenose hybrids reside in captivity: one at Discovery Cove and the other SeaWorld San Diego.
Trade and capture
In the early days, many bottlenose dolphins were wild-caught off the coast of Florida. Though the Marine Mammal Protection Act, established in 1972, allows an exception for the collection of dolphins for public display and research purposes when a permit is obtained, bottlenose dolphins have not been captured in American waters since 1989. In most Western countries, breeding programs have been set up to provide the dolphinariums with new animals. To achieve a sufficient birth rate and to prevent inbreeding, artificial insemination (AI) is occasionally used. The use of AI also allows dolphinariums to increase the genetic diversity of their population without having to bring in any dolphins from other facilities.
The trade of dolphins is regulated by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (also known as the Washington Convention or CITES). Endangered dolphin species are included in CITES' Appendix I, in which case trade is permitted only in exceptional circumstances. Species considered not to be threatened with extinction are included in Appendix II, in which case trade "must be controlled in order to avoid utilization incompatible with their survival". Most cetacean species traded for display in captivity to the public or for use in swimming with dolphins and other interaction programs are listed on Appendix II.
However, the dolphin trade still continues. A live bottlenose dolphin is estimated to be worth between a few thousand to several tens of thousands of US dollars, depending on age, condition and prior training. Captures are reported to be on the rise in the South Pacific and the Caribbean, Cuba has also been an exporter of dolphins in recent years, this being organized by the Acuario Nacional de Cuba. In recent years, the Solomon Islands have also allowed the collection and export of dolphins for public display facilities. A 2005 law banned the export of dolphins, however, this ban was seemingly overturned in 2007 when some 28 dolphins were shipped to Dubai.
Criticism and legal bansAnimal welfare
Many animal welfare groups such as the World Animal Protection consider keeping dolphins in captivity to be a form of animal abuse. The main arguments are that dolphins do not have enough freedom of movement in pools, regardless of pool size, (in the wild, dolphins swim hundreds of miles every day) and do not get enough stimulation. Dolphins often show repetitive behavior in captivity and sometimes become aggressive towards other animals or people. In some cases, the behavior of dolphins in captivity also results in their own death.
The lifespan of dolphins in captivity is another subject of debate. Research has shown that there is no significant difference between wild and captive survival rates for bottlenose dolphins. This does not, however, reflect a global state of affairs: for example, bottlenose dolphins in captive facilities in Jamaica suffer from extremely high mortality rates.
Some scientists suggest that the "unusually high" intelligence of dolphins means that they should be recognized as "non-human persons". In 2013, the Indian Ministry of Environment and Forests prohibited the captivity of dolphins on these grounds, finding it "morally unacceptable to keep them captive for entertainment purpose".
Legal bans or restrictions relating to keeping cetaceans in captivity
According to animal rights organizations that monitor the subject, the following jurisdictions have full or partial bans on keeping dolphins in captivity: Bolivia, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Greece, Hungary, India, Slovenia, Switzerland, Turkey, and the American states California, New York, and South Carolina. Other countries have laws so restrictive that is virtually impossible to keep cetaceans in captivity: Brazil, Luxembourg, Nicaragua, Norway, and the United Kingdom. France tried to ban keeping or breeding cetaceans in captivity in 2017, but the ban was overturned on technical grounds by the Conseil d'État in 2018. On 29 September 2020, Environment Minister Barbara Pompili announced that France's three remaining dolphinariums would be closed within the next 7 to 10 years, and no new dolphinariums could be opened, and no new marine mammals could be bred or imported.

Belgium: On 31 August 2020, the Brussels Capital Region (which has no dolphinaria) announced it was working on a ban on any future creation of dolphinariums to safeguard the welfare of any marine mammals that might end up being kept within its territory. In November 2024, following earlier bans in Brussels and Wallonia, the Flanders region (home to the country's last remaining dolphinarium: Boudewijn Seapark in Bruges) followed suit, meaning that a country-wide prohibition on dolphinariums was to be implemented by 2037 at the latest, but possibly sooner. Reportedly, this made Belgium the 7th country in the world, alongside "India, Costa Rica, Chile, Croatia, Slovenia, and Cyprus, which have already implemented strict bans on the captivity of dolphins."
Canada: In June 2019, the Ending the Captivity of Whales and Dolphins Act became law in Canada. Two facilities would be affected, Marineland of Canada and the Vancouver Aquarium. When passed in June 2019, Marineland was reported to have 61 cetaceans, while the Vancouver Aquarium had just one dolphin remaining. The law has a grandfather clause, permitting those cetaceans already in captivity to remain where they are, but breeding and further acquisition of cetaceans is prohibited, subject to limited exceptions.
France: Since September 2020, a phaseout of dolphinariums has been in progress in France (to be completed by 2027/30).
Mexico: The Chamber of Deputies amended the General Wildlife Law in October 2022 to prohibit the use of marine mammals in commercial shows or for subsistence. Animals currently kept in captivity could be kept for the rest of their lives, but using them in shows was no longer permitted. The Mexican Senate confirmed the ban in 2023, but as of February 2024, several theme parks and aquariums were refusing to comply, using legal means to delay the law's implementation, and seeking to overturn the ban.
Spain: With more than 100 cetaceans in captivity, Spain had the most of any European country in 2023, according to World Animal Protection, and about ten dolphinariums were still operating. In April 2023 the #NoEsPaísParaDelfines campaign, led by the animal rights activist Olivia Mandle, delivered more than 154,000 signatures to the Congress of Deputies calling for a ban on dolphinariums; the animal welfare law passed in March 2023 had left dolphins out of its scope.
Switzerland: Dolphinariums are not technically prohibited, but there have been no dolphinariums in Switzerland since 2013, and it is practically impossible to set up and run a new one. The Animal Protection Act was amended in May 2012, stipulating: "It is forbidden to import dolphins and other cetaceans (Cetacea)." Therefore, the last facility that still kept cetaceans in Switzerland decided to close its dolphinarium by the end of 2013.


This is a list of the mammal species recorded in Malaysia. There are 313 mammal species in Malaysia, of which six are critically endangered, seventeen are endangered, twenty-eight are vulnerable, and one is near threatened. Every mammal in Malaysia belongs to the subclass Theria, and the infraclass Eutheria, as all are placental mammals. They are listed below by the order which they belong to.
The following tags are used to highlight each species' conservation status as assessed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature:
Proboscidea (elephants)
The elephants comprise three living species and are the largest living land animals.

Family: Elephantidae (elephants)
Genus: Elephas
Asian elephant, E. maximus EN
Sirenia (manatees and dugongs)
Sirenia is an order of fully aquatic, herbivorous mammals that inhabit rivers, estuaries, coastal marine waters, swamps, and marine wetlands. All four species are endangered.

Family: Dugongidae
Genus: Dugong
Dugong, D. dugon VU
Scandentia (treeshrews)
The treeshrews are small mammals native to the tropical forests of Southeast Asia. Although called treeshrews, they are not true shrews and are not all arboreal.

Family: Tupaiidae (treeshrews)
Genus: Dendrogale
Bornean smooth-tailed treeshrew, D. melanura DD
Genus: Tupaia
Northern treeshrew, T. belangeri LC
Striped treeshrew, T. dorsalis DD
Common treeshrew, T. glis LC
Slender treeshrew, T. gracilis LC
Long-footed treeshrew, T. longipes LC
Pygmy treeshrew, T. minor LC
Mountain treeshrew, T. montana LC
Painted treeshrew, T. picta LC
Large treeshrew, T. tana LC
Family: Ptilocercidae
Genus: Ptilocercus
Pen-tailed treeshrew, P. lowii LC
Dermoptera (colugos)
The two species of colugos make up the order Dermoptera. They are arboreal gliding mammals found in Southeast Asia.

Family: Cynocephalidae (flying lemurs)
Genus: Galeopterus
Sunda flying lemur, G. variegatus LC
Primates
The order Primates contains humans and their closest relatives: lemurs, lorisoids, monkeys, and apes.

Suborder: Strepsirrhini
Infraorder: Lemuriformes
Superfamily: Lorisoidea
Family: Lorisidae
Genus: Nycticebus
Sunda slow loris, N. coucang EN
Suborder: Haplorhini
Infraorder: Tarsiiformes
Family: Tarsiidae (tarsiers)
Genus: Cephalopachus
Horsfield's tarsier, C. bancanus VU
Infraorder: Simiiformes
Parvorder: Catarrhini
Superfamily: Cercopithecoidea
Family: Cercopithecidae (Old World monkeys)
Subfamily: Cercopithecinae
Genus: Macaca
Stump-tailed macaque, M. arctoides VU
Crab-eating macaque, M. fascicularis VU
Southern pig-tailed macaque, M. nemestrina VU
Subfamily: Colobinae
Genus: Nasalis
Proboscis monkey, N. larvatus EN
Genus: Presbytis
Raffles' banded langur, P. femoralis VU
White-faced surili, P. frontata DD
Hose's langur, P. hosei DD
Robinson's banded langur, P. robinsoni NT
Maroon leaf monkey, P. rubicunda VU
Saban grizzled langur, P. sabana EN
White-thighed surili, P. siamensis DD
Genus: Trachypithecus
Dusky leaf monkey, T. obscurus EN
Silvery lutung, T. cristatus NT
Selangor silvered langur, T. selangorensis
Superfamily: Hominoidea
Family: Hylobatidae (gibbons)
Genus: Hylobates
Agile gibbon, H. agilis EN
Lar gibbon, H. lar EN
Müller's gibbon, H. muelleri EN
Genus: Symphalangus
Siamang, S. syndactylus EN
Family: Hominidae
Subfamily: Ponginae
Genus: Pongo
Bornean orangutan, P. pygmaeus EN
Rodentia (rodents)
Rodents make up the largest order of mammals, with over 40% of mammalian species. They have two incisors in the upper and lower jaw which grow continually and must be kept short by gnawing. Most rodents are small though the capybara can weigh up to 45 kg (99 lb).

Infraorder: Hystricognathi
Family: Hystricidae (Old World porcupines)
Genus: Atherurus
Asiatic brush-tailed porcupine, A. macrourus LC
Genus: Hystrix
Malayan porcupine, H. brachyura LC
Thick-spined porcupine, H. crassispinis NT
Genus: Trichys
Long-tailed porcupine, T. fasciculata LC
Infraorder: Sciurognathi
Family: Sciuridae (squirrels)
Subfamily: Ratufinae
Genus: Ratufa
Cream-coloured giant squirrel, R. affinis NT
Black giant squirrel, R. bicolor NT
Subfamily: Sciurinae
Tribe: Sciurini
Genus: Rheithrosciurus
Tufted ground squirrel, Rheithrosciurus macrotis
Tribe: Pteromyini
Genus: Aeromys
Black flying squirrel, Aeromys tephromelas
Thomas's flying squirrel, Aeromys thomasi
Genus: Hylopetes
Grey-cheeked flying squirrel, Hylopetes lepidus
Red-cheeked flying squirrel, Hylopetes spadiceus
Genus: Iomys
Javanese flying squirrel, Iomys horsfieldi
Genus: Petaurillus
Lesser pygmy flying squirrel, Petaurillus emiliae
Hose's pygmy flying squirrel, Petaurillus hosei
Selangor pygmy flying squirrel, Petaurillus kinlochii
Genus: Petaurista
Spotted giant flying squirrel, Petaurista elegans
Red giant flying squirrel, Petaurista petaurista
Genus: Petinomys
Whiskered flying squirrel, Petinomys genibarbis
Temminck's flying squirrel, Petinomys setosus
Vordermann's flying squirrel, Petinomys vordermanni
Genus: Pteromyscus
Smoky flying squirrel, Pteromyscus pulverulentus
Subfamily: Callosciurinae
Genus: Callosciurus
Ear-spot squirrel, Callosciurus adamsi
Kinabalu squirrel, Callosciurus baluensis
Grey-bellied squirrel, Callosciurus caniceps
Pallas's squirrel, Callosciurus erythraeus
Black-striped squirrel, Callosciurus nigrovittatus
Plantain squirrel, Callosciurus notatus
Borneo black-banded squirrel, Callosciurus orestes
Prevost's squirrel, Callosciurus prevostii
Genus: Dremomys
Bornean mountain ground squirrel, Sundasciurus everetti
Asian red-cheeked squirrel, Dremomys rufigenis
Genus: Exilisciurus
Least pygmy squirrel, Exilisciurus exilis
Tufted pygmy squirrel, Exilisciurus whiteheadi
Genus: Glyphotes
Sculptor squirrel, Glyphotes simus
Genus: Lariscus
Four-striped ground squirrel, Lariscus hosei VU
Three-striped ground squirrel, Lariscus insignis
Genus: Nannosciurus
Black-eared squirrel, Nannosciurus melanotis
Genus: Rhinosciurus
Shrew-faced squirrel, Rhinosciurus laticaudatus
Genus: Sundasciurus
Brooke's squirrel, Sundasciurus brookei
Horse-tailed squirrel, Sundasciurus hippurus
Jentink's squirrel, Sundasciurus jentinki VU
Low's squirrel, Sundasciurus lowii
Robinson's squirrel, Sundasciurus robinsoni
Upland squirrel, Sundasciurus tahan
Slender squirrel, Sundasciurus tenuis
Genus: Tamiops
Himalayan striped squirrel, Tamiops macclellandi
Family: Spalacidae
Subfamily: Rhizomyinae
Genus: Rhizomys
Hoary bamboo rat, Rhizomys pruinosus
Large bamboo rat, Rhizomys sumatrensis
Family: Muridae (mice, rats, voles, gerbils, hamsters)
Subfamily: Murinae
Genus: Berylmys
Bower's white-toothed rat, Berylmys bowersi
Genus: Chiropodomys
Indomalayan pencil-tailed tree mouse, Chiropodomys gliroides
Large pencil-tailed tree mouse, Chiropodomys major
Grey-bellied pencil-tailed tree mouse, Chiropodomys muroides
Small pencil-tailed tree mouse, Chiropodomys pusillus
Genus: Haeromys
Ranee mouse, Haeromys margarettae VU
Lesser ranee mouse, Haeromys pusillus VU
Genus: Hapalomys
Marmoset rat, Hapalomys longicaudatus
Genus: Lenothrix
Grey tree rat, Lenothrix canus
Genus: Leopoldamys
Edwards's long-tailed giant rat, Leopoldamys edwardsi
Long-tailed giant rat, Leopoldamys sabanus
Genus: Maxomys
Mountain spiny rat, Maxomys alticola EN
Small spiny rat, Maxomys baeodon DD
Malayan mountain spiny rat, Maxomys inas
Chestnut-bellied spiny rat, Maxomys ochraceiventer
Rajah spiny rat, Maxomys rajah
Red spiny rat, Maxomys surifer
Whitehead's spiny rat, Maxomys whiteheadi
Genus: Mus
Ryukyu mouse, Mus caroli
Genus: Niviventer
Dark-tailed tree rat, Niviventer cremoriventer
Chestnut white-bellied rat, Niviventer fulvescens
Long-tailed mountain rat, Niviventer rapit
Genus: Pithecheir
Malayan tree rat, Pithecheir parvus
Genus: Rattus
Brown rat, R. norvegicus LC introduced
Annandale's rat, Rattus annandalei
Ricefield rat, Rattus argentiventer
Summit rat, Rattus baluensis EN
Timor rat, Rattus timorensis DD
Malayan field rat, Rattus tiomanicus
Genus: Sundamys
Mountain giant Sunda rat, Sundamys infraluteus
Müller's giant Sunda rat, Sundamys muelleri
Eulipotyphla (shrews, moles, and hedgehogs)
The "shrew-forms" are insectivorous mammals. The shrews and solenodons closely resemble mice while the moles are stout-bodied burrowers. The hedgehogs are easily recognised by their spines while gymnures look more like large rats.

Family: Erinaceidae (hedgehogs)
Subfamily: Galericinae
Genus: Echinosorex
Moonrat, E. gymnura LC
Genus: Hylomys
Bornean short-tailed gymnure, H. dorsalis
Max's short-tailed gymnure, H. maxi
Northern short-tailed gymnure, H. peguensis
Family: Soricidae (shrews)
Subfamily: Crocidurinae
Genus: Crocidura
Grey shrew, C. attenuata LC
Southeast Asian shrew, C. fuliginosa LC
Malayan shrew, C. malayana LC
Sunda shrew, C. monticola LC
Genus: Suncus
Black shrew, S. ater DD
Etruscan shrew, S. etruscus LC
Bornean pygmy shrew, S. hosei VU
Malayan pygmy shrew, S. malayanus DD
Asian house shrew, S. murinus LC
Subfamily: Soricinae
Tribe: Nectogalini
Genus: Chimarrogale
Malayan water shrew, C. hantu NT
Sunda water shrew, C. phaeura EN
Family: Talpidae (moles)
Subfamily: Talpinae
Tribe: Talpini
Genus: Euroscaptor
Malaysian mole, E. malayana
Chiroptera (bats)
The bats' most distinguishing feature is that their forelimbs are developed as wings, making them the only mammals capable of flight. Bat species account for about 20% of all mammals.

Family: Pteropodidae (flying foxes, Old World fruit bats)
Subfamily: Pteropodinae
Genus: Aethalops
Pygmy fruit bat, Aethalops alecto
Genus: Balionycteris
Spotted-winged fruit bat, Balionycteris maculata
Genus: Chironax
Black-capped fruit bat, Chironax melanocephalus
Genus: Cynopterus
Lesser short-nosed fruit bat, C. brachyotis LC
Horsfield's fruit bat, Cynopterus horsfieldi
Greater short-nosed fruit bat, Cynopterus sphinx
Genus: Dyacopterus
Dayak fruit bat, Dyacopterus spadiceus
Genus: Megaerops
Tailless fruit bat, Megaerops ecaudatus
White-collared fruit bat, Megaerops wetmorei
Genus: Penthetor
Dusky fruit bat, Penthetor lucasi
Genus: Pteropus
Small flying fox, Pteropus hypomelanus
Large flying fox, Pteropus vampyrus
Genus: Rousettus
Bare-backed rousette, Rousettus spinalatus VU
Subfamily: Macroglossinae
Genus: Eonycteris
Greater dawn bat, Eonycteris major
Lesser dawn bat, Eonycteris spelaea
Genus: Macroglossus
Long-tongued nectar bat, Macroglossus minimus
Long-tongued fruit bat, Macroglossus sobrinus
Family: Vespertilionidae
Subfamily: Kerivoulinae
Genus: Kerivoula
Flores woolly bat, Kerivoula flora
Hardwicke's woolly bat, Kerivoula hardwickii
Small woolly bat, Kerivoula intermedia
Least woolly bat, Kerivoula minuta
Papillose woolly bat, Kerivoula papillosa
Clear-winged woolly bat, Kerivoula pellucida
Painted bat, Kerivoula picta
Whitehead's woolly bat, Kerivoula whiteheadi
Genus: Phoniscus
Groove-toothed bat, Phoniscus atrox
Peters's trumpet-eared bat, Phoniscus jagorii
Subfamily: Myotinae
Genus: Myotis
Large-footed bat, Myotis adversus
Hodgson's bat, M. formosus LC
Gomantong myotis, Myotis gomantongensis DD
Lesser large-footed bat, Myotis hasseltii LC
Horsfield's bat, Myotis horsfieldii LC
Pallid large-footed myotis, Myotis macrotarsus
Burmese whiskered bat, Myotis montivagus
Whiskered myotis, Myotis muricola LC
Whiskered bat, M. mystacinus LC
Ridley's bat, Myotis ridleyi
Himalayan whiskered bat, Myotis siligorensis
Subfamily: Vespertilioninae
Genus: Arielulus
Coppery pipistrelle, Arielulus cuprosus VU
Social pipistrelle, Arielulus societatis DD
Genus: Falsistrellus
Peters's pipistrelle, Falsistrellus petersi
Genus: Glischropus
Common thick-thumbed bat, Glischropus tylopus
Genus: Hesperoptenus
Blanford's bat, Hesperoptenus blanfordi
False serotine bat, Hesperoptenus doriae EN
Large false serotine, Hesperoptenus tomesi
Genus: Hypsugo
Brown pipistrelle, Hypsugo imbricatus
Red-brown pipistrelle, Hypsugo kitcheneri
Big-eared pipistrelle, Hypsugo macrotis
Genus: Nyctalus
Common noctule, N. noctula LC
Genus: Philetor
Rohu's bat, Philetor brachypterus
Genus: Pipistrellus
Kelaart's pipistrelle, Pipistrellus ceylonicus
Java pipistrelle, Pipistrellus javanicus
Narrow-winged pipistrelle, Pipistrellus stenopterus
Genus: Scotophilus
Lesser Asiatic yellow bat, Scotophilus kuhlii
Genus: Tylonycteris
Lesser bamboo bat, Tylonycteris pachypus
Greater bamboo bat, Tylonycteris robustula
Subfamily: Murininae
Genus: Harpiocephalus
Greater hairy-winged bat, Harpiocephalus mordax
Genus: Murina
Bronze tube-nosed bat, Murina aenea
Round-eared tube-nosed bat, Murina cyclotis
Hutton's tube-nosed bat, Murina huttoni
Gilded tube-nosed bat, Murina rozendaali
Brown tube-nosed bat, Murina suilla
Subfamily: Miniopterinae
Genus: Miniopterus
Western bent-winged bat, Miniopterus magnater
Intermediate long-fingered bat, Miniopterus medius
Small bent-winged bat, Miniopterus pusillus
Common bent-wing bat, M. schreibersii VU
Family: Molossidae
Genus: Chaerephon
Northern free-tailed bat, Chaerephon johorensis
Wrinkle-lipped free-tailed bat, Chaerephon plicata
Genus: Cheiromeles
Hairless bat, Cheiromeles torquatus
Genus: Mops
Malayan free-tailed bat, Mops mops
Family: Emballonuridae
Genus: Emballonura
Small Asian sheath-tailed bat, Emballonura alecto
Lesser sheath-tailed bat, Emballonura monticola
Genus: Saccolaimus
Naked-rumped pouched bat, Saccolaimus saccolaimus
Genus: Taphozous
Long-winged tomb bat, Taphozous longimanus
Black-bearded tomb bat, Taphozous melanopogon
Family: Nycteridae
Genus: Nycteris
Malayan slit-faced bat, Nycteris tragata
Family: Megadermatidae
Genus: Megaderma
Greater false vampire bat, Megaderma lyra
Lesser false vampire bat, Megaderma spasma
Family: Rhinolophidae
Subfamily: Rhinolophinae
Genus: Rhinolophus
Acuminate horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus acuminatus
Intermediate horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus affinis
Arcuate horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus arcuatus
Bornean horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus borneensis
Croslet horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus coelophyllus
Convex horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus convexus
Creagh's horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus creaghi
Blyth's horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus lepidus
Woolly horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus luctus
Big-eared horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus macrotis
Malayan horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus malayanus
Marshall's horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus marshalli
Smaller horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus megaphyllus
Pearson's horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus pearsoni
Large-eared horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus philippinensis
Least horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus pusillus
Lesser woolly horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus sedulus
Shamel's horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus shameli
Lesser brown horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus stheno
Trefoil horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus trifoliatus
Subfamily: Hipposiderinae
Genus: Aselliscus
Stoliczka's trident bat, Aselliscus stoliczkanus
Genus: Coelops
East Asian tailless leaf-nosed bat, Coelops frithii
Malayan tailless leaf-nosed bat, Coelops robinsoni
Genus: Hipposideros
Great roundleaf bat, Hipposideros armiger
Dusky roundleaf bat, Hipposideros ater
Bicolored roundleaf bat, Hipposideros bicolor
Fawn leaf-nosed bat, Hipposideros cervinus
Ashy roundleaf bat, Hipposideros cineraceus
Cox's roundleaf bat, Hipposideros coxi VU
Diadem roundleaf bat, Hipposideros diadema
Borneo roundleaf bat, Hipposideros doriae DD
Dayak roundleaf bat, Hipposideros dyacorum
Cantor's roundleaf bat, Hipposideros galeritus
Intermediate roundleaf bat, Hipposideros larvatus
Large Asian roundleaf bat, Hipposideros lekaguli
Shield-faced roundleaf bat, Hipposideros lylei
Malayan roundleaf bat, Hipposideros nequam
Pomona roundleaf bat, Hipposideros pomona
Pratt's roundleaf bat, Hipposideros pratti
Ridley's leaf-nosed bat, Hipposideros ridleyi VU
Pholidota (pangolins)
The order Pholidota comprises the eight species of pangolin. Pangolins are anteaters and have the powerful claws, elongated snout and long tongue seen in the other unrelated anteater species.

Family: Manidae
Genus: Manis
Sunda pangolin, M. javanica CR
Cetacea (whales)
The order Cetacea includes whales, dolphins and porpoises. They are the mammals most fully adapted to aquatic life with a spindle-shaped nearly hairless body, protected by a thick layer of blubber, and forelimbs and tail modified to provide propulsion underwater.

Parvorder: Mysticeti
Family: Balaenopteridae
Subfamily: Balaenopterinae
Genus: Balaenoptera
Common minke whale, B. acutorostrata LC
Antarctic minke whale, Balaenoptera bonaerensis DD
Sei whale, Balaenoptera borealis EN
Bryde's whale, Balaenoptera edeni DD
Blue whale, Balaenoptera musculus EN
Omura's whale, Balaenoptera omurai DD
Fin whale, Balaenoptera physalus EN
Subfamily: Megapterinae
Genus: Megaptera
Humpback whale, M. novaeangliae LC
Parvorder: Odontoceti
Superfamily: Platanistoidea
Family: Phocoenidae
Genus: Neophocaena
Finless porpoise, Neophocaena phocaenoides DD
Family: Physeteridae
Genus: Physeter
Sperm whale, Physeter macrocephalus VU
Family: Kogiidae
Genus: Kogia
Pygmy sperm whale, K. breviceps DD
Dwarf sperm whale, Kogia sima
Family: Ziphidae
Subfamily: Hyperoodontinae
Genus: Mesoplodon
Blainville's beaked whale, Mesoplodon densirostris DD
Ginkgo-toothed beaked whale, Mesoplodon ginkgodens DD
Genus: Ziphius
Cuvier's beaked whale, Ziphius cavirostris DD
Family: Delphinidae (marine dolphins)
Genus: Steno
Rough-toothed dolphin, Steno bredanensis DD
Genus: Sousa
Indo-Pacific humpbacked dolphin, Sousa chinensis DD
Genus: Tursiops
Indo-Pacific bottlenose dolphin, Tursiops aduncus DD
Common bottlenose dolphin, Tursiops truncatus DD
Genus: Delphinus
Long-beaked common dolphin, Delphinus capensis DD
Genus: Grampus
Risso's dolphin, Grampus griseus DD
Genus: Peponocephala
Melon-headed whale, Peponocephala electra
Genus: Feresa
Pygmy killer whale, Feresa attenuata DD
Genus: Globicephala
Short-finned pilot whale, Globicephala macrorhynchus DD
Genus: Lagenodelphis
Fraser's dolphin, Lagenodelphis hosei DD
Genus: Orcaella
Irrawaddy dolphin, O. brevirostris EN
Genus: Orcinus
Orca, O. orca DD
Genus: Pseudorca
False killer whale, Pseudorca crassidens DD
Genus: Stenella
Pantropical spotted dolphin, Stenella attenuata
Spinner dolphin, Stenella longirostris
Striped dolphin, Stenella coeruleoalba LC
Carnivora (carnivorans)
There are over 260 species of carnivorans, the majority of which feed primarily on meat. They have a characteristic skull shape and dentition.

Suborder: Feliformia
Family: Felidae (cats)
Subfamily: Felinae
Genus: Catopuma
Bay cat, C. badia EN
Asian golden cat, C. temminckii NT
Genus: Pardofelis
Marbled cat, P. marmorata NT
Genus: Prionailurus
Leopard cat, P. bengalensis LC
Flat-headed cat, P. planiceps VU
Subfamily: Pantherinae
Genus: Neofelis
Sunda clouded leopard, N. diardi VU
Clouded leopard, N. nebulosa VU
Genus: Panthera
Leopard, P. pardus VU
Indochinese leopard, P. p. delacouri CR
Tiger, P. tigris EN
Malayan tiger, P. t. tigris CR
Family: Viverridae (civets, mongooses, etc.)
Subfamily: Paradoxurinae
Genus: Arctictis
Binturong, A. binturong VU
Genus: Arctogalidia
Small-toothed palm civet, A. trivirgata LC
Genus: Paguma
Masked palm civet, P. larvata LC
Genus: Paradoxurus
Asian palm civet, P. hermaphroditus  LC
Subfamily: Hemigalinae
Genus: Cynogale
Otter civet, C. bennettii EN
Genus: Diplogale
Hose's palm civet, D. hosei VU
Genus: Hemigalus
Banded palm civet, H. derbyanus NT
Subfamily: Prionodontinae
Genus: Prionodon
Banded linsang, P. linsang LC
Subfamily: Viverrinae
Genus: Viverra
Large-spotted civet, V. megaspila LC
Malayan civet, V. tangalunga LC
Large Indian civet, V. zibetha LC
Genus: Viverricula
Small Indian civet, V. indica LC
Family: Herpestidae (mongooses)
Genus: Urva
Short-tailed mongoose, U. brachyura NT
Javan mongoose, U. javanica  LC
Collared mongoose, U. semitorquata NT
Crab-eating mongoose, U. urva LC
Suborder: Caniformia
Family: Canidae (dogs, foxes)
Genus: Cuon
Dhole, C. alpinus EN
Family: Ursidae (bears)
Genus: Helarctos
Sun bear, H. malayanus VU
Family: Mustelidae (mustelids)
Genus: Aonyx
Asian small-clawed otter, A. cinereus VU
Genus: Lutra
Hairy-nosed otter, L. sumatrana EN
Genus: Lutrogale
Smooth-coated otter, L. perspicillata VU
Genus: Martes
Yellow-throated marten, M. flavigula LC
Genus: Melogale
Bornean ferret-badger, M. everetti VU
Genus: Mustela
Malayan weasel, M. nudipes LC
Genus: Mydaus
Sunda stink badger, M. javanensis LC
Perissodactyla (odd-toed ungulates)
The odd-toed ungulates are browsing and grazing mammals. They are usually large to very large, and have relatively simple stomachs and a large middle toe.

Family: Tapiridae (tapirs)
Genus: Acrocodia
Malayan tapir, A. indica EN
Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates)
The even-toed ungulates are ungulates whose weight is borne about equally by the third and fourth toes, rather than mostly or entirely by the third as in perissodactyls. There are about 220 artiodactyl species, including many that are of great economic importance to humans.

Family: Tragulidae
Genus: Tragulus
Lesser mouse deer, T. javanicus LC
Napu, T. napu LC
Family: Cervidae (deer)
Subfamily: Cervinae
Genus: Rusa
Sambar deer, R. unicolor VU
Subfamily: Muntiacinae
Genus: Muntiacus
Bornean yellow muntjac, M. atherodes LC
Indian muntjac, M. muntjak LC
Family: Bovidae (cattle, antelope, sheep, goats)
Subfamily: Bovinae
Genus: Bos
Gaur, B. gaurus VU
Banteng, B. javanicus EN
Subfamily: Caprinae
Genus: Capricornis
Mainland serow, C. sumatraensis VU
Family: Suidae (pigs)
Subfamily: Suinae
Genus: Sus
Bornean bearded pig, S. barbatus VU
Wild boar, S. scrofa LC
Extirpated
The following species are locally extinct in the country:

Wild water buffalo, Bubalus arnee
Sumatran rhinoceros, Dicerorhinus sumatrensis
Javan rhinoceros, Rhinoceros sondaicus


The Asian land mammal ages, acronym ALMA, establish a geologic timescale for prehistoric Asian fauna, from the Paleocene to the Pleistocene. These periods are referred to as ages, stages, or intervals and were established using geographic place names where fossil materials where obtained. Many of the ALMAs are based on corresponding faunas found in the Erlian Basin in Inner Mongolia, China.
The basic unit of measure is the first/last boundary statement. This shows that the first appearance event of one taxon is known to predate the last appearance event of another. If two taxa are found in the same fossil quarry or at the same stratigraphic horizon, then their age-range zones overlap.
Ages
Direct radiometric dating of all ALMAs has not proven possible. Few absolute dates have been proposed, and those that have been are approximate and based on correlations to faunas in other parts of the world.
Other continental ages
European land mammal age
North American land mammal age
South American land mammal age
African land mammal age


This is a collection of lists of mammal gestation period estimated by experts in their fields. The mammals included are only viviparous (marsupials and placentals) as some mammals, which are monotremes (including platypuses and echidnas) lay their eggs. A marsupial has a short gestation period, typically shorter than placental. For more information on how these estimates were ascertained, see Wikipedia's articles on gestational age.
The gestation figures given here are shown in days. They represent average values and should only be considered as approximations.
Factors affecting the gestation period in mammals
There are several factors affecting the length of the gestation period in mammals.
Animal size/mass
There is a positive relationship between mass at birth and length of gestation in eutherian mammals. Larger mammals are more likely to produce a well-developed neonate than small mammals. Large mammals develop at an absolute slower rate compared to small mammals. Thus, the large mammal tend have longer gestation periods than small mammal as they tend to produce larger neonate. Large mammals require a longer period of time to attain any proportion of adult mass compared to small mammals.
The level of development at birth
More developed infants will typically require a longer gestation period. Altricial mammals needs less time to gestate compare to the precocial (well-developed neonate) mammal. A typical precocial mammal has a gestation period almost four times longer than a typical altricial mammal of the same body size. Precocial mammal species generally have greater adult body weights than altricial mammals as precocial mammals have markedly longer gestation periods than altricial mammals. The neonatal of larger mammals develop relatively more quickly and thus making it more likely that a large mammal would produce a more well-developed neonate as a consequence of its longer gestation period. In some cases, some mammal species may have similar gestation periods despite having significantly different body masses.
Environmental factor
In response to the conditions of the environment, some mammals, such as bat delay the implantation due to the cold temperature in winter. Another factor is due to the shortage of food stocks during winter as the insects are being driven away and as the result, bat hibernate in pregnant condition.
In pinnipeds, the purpose of delayed implantation is in order to increase survival chance of the young animals as the mother ensure that the neonates are born at an optimal season.


Prior to human settlement, the mammals of New Zealand consisted entirely of several species of bat and several dozen marine mammal species. Far earlier, during the Miocene, at least one "archaic" terrestrial mammal species is known to have existed, the Saint Bathans mammal. The Māori brought the kurī (Polynesian Dog) and kiore (Polynesian rat) in about 1250 CE, and Europeans from 1769 onwards brought the pig, mice, two additional species of rats, weasels, stoats, ferrets and possums and many other species, some of which cause conservation problems for indigenous species.
Native species
Three recent species of bats: the long-tailed, short-tailed and lesser short-tailed. Though they varied in range, Holocene fossils of all three species have been found near Cape Reinga / Te Rerenga Wairua at the far north of the North Island. The Miocene Saint Bathans Fauna showcases a considerably higher diversity of at least four mystacine species, a vesper bat and several incertae sedis taxa.
Several dozen species of whales and dolphins including the small endemic Hector's dolphin
Seven species of seal or sea lion
The Miocene Saint Bathans mammal.
Conservation status
The New Zealand lesser short-tailed bat is considered endangered (EN), whereas the New Zealand greater short-tailed bat is presumed extinct (EX) with the last sighting being in 1967. The New Zealand long-tailed bat is considered to be critically endangered (CR).
The sei, fin and blue whales are all endangered (EN), as is the Hector's dolphin which is found only in New Zealand waters.
The Department of Conservation ranks priorities for conservation with the New Zealand Threat Classification System.
Introduced species
The Māori introduced two species: the kurī (dog) and kiore (Polynesian rat). European settlers introduced all other mammal species.


The elk (pl.: elk or elks; Cervus canadensis) or wapiti (pronounced ) is the second largest species within the deer family, Cervidae, and one of the largest terrestrial mammals in its native range of North America and Central and East Asia. The word "elk" originally referred to the European variety of the moose, Alces alces, but was transferred to Cervus canadensis by North American colonists.
The name "wapiti" is derived from a Shawnee and Cree word meaning "white rump", after the distinctive light fur around the tail region which the animals may fluff-up or raise to signal their agitation or distress to one another, when fleeing perceived threats, or among males courting females and sparring for dominance. A similar trait is seen in other artiodactyl species, like the bighorn sheep, pronghorn and the white-tailed deer, to varying degrees.
Elk dwell in open forest and forest-edge habitats, grazing on grasses and sedges and browsing higher-growing plants, leaves, twigs and bark. Male elk have large, blood- and nerve-filled antlers, which they routinely shed each year as the weather warms. Males also engage in ritualized mating behaviors during the mating season, including posturing to attract females, antler-wrestling (sparring), and bugling, a loud series of throaty whistles, bellows, screams, and other vocalizations that establish dominance over other males and aim to attract females.
Elk were long believed to belong to a subspecies of the European red deer (Cervus elaphus), but evidence from many mitochondrial DNA genetic studies, beginning in 1998, shows that the two are distinct species. The elk's wider rump-patch and paler-hued antlers are key morphological differences that distinguish C. canadensis from C. elaphus. Although it is currently only native to North America, and Central, East and North Asia, elk once had a much wider distribution in the past; prehistoric populations were present across Eurasia and into Western Europe during the Late Pleistocene, surviving into the early Holocene in Southern Sweden and the Alps. The now-extinct North American Merriam's elk subspecies (Cervus canadensis merriami) once ranged south into Mexico. The wapiti has also successfully adapted to countries outside of its natural range where it has been introduced, including Argentina and New Zealand; the animal's adaptability in these areas may, in fact, be so successful as to threaten the sensitive endemic ecosystems and species it encounters.
As a member of the Artiodactyla order (and distant relative of the Bovidae), elk are susceptible to several infectious diseases which can be transmitted to or from domesticated livestock. Efforts to eliminate infectious diseases from elk populations, primarily by vaccination, have had mixed success. Some cultures revere the elk as having spiritual significance. Antlers and velvet are used in traditional medicines in parts of Asia; the production of ground antler and velvet supplements is also a thriving naturopathic industry in several countries, including the United States, China and Canada. The elk is hunted as a game species, and their meat is lean and higher in protein than beef or chicken.
Naming and etymology
By the 17th century, Alces alces (moose, derives from Latin alces cognate to "elk" in Europe) had long been extirpated from the British Isles, thus the meaning of the word "elk" to English-speakers became rather vague, acquiring a meaning similar to "large deer". The name wapiti is from the Shawnee and Cree word waapiti (in Cree syllabics: ᐙᐱᑎ or ᐚᐱᑎ), meaning "white rump". There is a subspecies of wapiti in Mongolia called the Altai wapiti (Cervus canadensis sibiricus), also known as the Altai maral.
According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the etymology of the word "elk" is "of obscure history". In Classical Antiquity, the European Alces alces was known as Ancient Greek: ἄλκη, romanized: álkē and Latin: alces, words probably borrowed from a Germanic language or another language of northern Europe. By the 8th century, during the Early Middle Ages, the moose was known as Old English: elch, elh, eolh, derived from the Proto-Germanic: *elho-, *elhon- and possibly connected with the Old Norse: elgr. Later, the species became known in Middle English as elk, elcke, or elke, appearing in the Latinized form alke, with the spelling alce borrowed directly from Latin: alces. Noting that elk "is not the normal phonetic representative" of the Old English elch, the Oxford English Dictionary derives elk from Middle High German: elch, itself from Old High German: elaho.
The American Cervus canadensis was recognized as a relative of the red deer (Cervus elaphus) of Europe, and so Cervus canadensis were referred to as "red deer". Richard Hakluyt refers to North America as a "lande ... full of many beastes, as redd dere" in his 1584 Discourse Concerning Western Planting. Similarly, John Smith's 1616 A Description of New England referred to red deer. Sir William Talbot's 1672 English translation of John Lederer's Latin Discoveries likewise called the species "red deer", but noted in parentheses that they were "for their unusual largeness improperly termed Elks by ignorant people". Both Thomas Jefferson's 1785 Notes on the State of Virginia and David Bailie Warden's 1816 Statistical, Political, and Historical Account of the United States used "red deer" to refer to Cervus canadensis.
Taxonomy
Members of the genus Cervus (and hence early relatives or possible ancestors of the elk) first appear in the fossil record 25 million years ago, during the Oligocene in Eurasia, but do not appear in the North American fossil record until the early Miocene. The extinct Irish elk (Megaloceros) was not a member of the genus Cervus but rather the largest member of the wider deer family (Cervidae) known from the fossil record.
Until recently, red deer and elk were considered to be one species, Cervus elaphus, with over a dozen subspecies. But mitochondrial DNA studies conducted in 2004 on hundreds of samples from red deer and elk subspecies and other species of the Cervus deer family, strongly indicate that elk, or wapiti, should be a distinct species, namely Cervus canadensis. DNA evidence validates that elk are more closely related to Thorold's deer (C. albirostris) and even sika deer (C. nippon) than they are to the red deer.
Elk and red deer produce fertile offspring in captivity, and the two species have freely inter-bred in New Zealand's Fiordland National Park. The cross-bred animals have resulted in the disappearance of virtually all pure elk blood from the area. Key morphological differences that distinguish C. canadensis from C. elaphus are the former's wider rump patch and paler-hued antlers.
Subspecies
There are numerous subspecies of elk described, with six from North America and four from Asia, although some taxonomists consider them different ecotypes or races of the same species (adapted to local environments through minor changes in appearance and behavior). Populations vary in antler shape and size, body size, coloration and mating behavior. DNA investigations of the Eurasian subspecies revealed that phenotypic variation in antlers, mane and rump patch development are based on "climatic-related lifestyle factors".
Of the six subspecies of elk known to have inhabited North America in historical times, four remain, including the Roosevelt (C. canadensis roosevelti), Tule (C. c. nannodes), Manitoban (C. c. manitobensis) and Rocky Mountain elk (C. c. nelsoni). The eastern elk (C. c. canadensis) and Merriam's elk (C. c. merriami) subspecies have been extinct for at least a century.
Four subspecies described from the Asian continent include the Altai wapiti (C. c. sibiricus) and the Tianshan wapiti (C. c. songaricus). Two distinct subspecies found in China, Mongolia, the Korean Peninsula and Siberia are the Manchurian wapiti (C. c. xanthopygus) and the Alashan wapiti (C. c. alashanicus). The Manchurian subspecies is darker, and more reddish, in coloration than other populations. The Alashan wapiti of northern Central China is the smallest of all the subspecies, has the lightest coloration, and is one of the least-studied.
Recent DNA analyses suggest that there are no more than three or four total subspecies of elk. All American forms, aside from possibly the Tule and the Roosevelt's elk, seem to belong to one subspecies—Cervus c. canadensis; even the Siberian elk (C. c. sibiricus) is, more or less, physically identical to the American forms, and thus may belong to this subspecies, too. However, the Manchurian wapiti (C. c. xanthopygus) is clearly distinct from the Siberian forms, but not distinguishable from the Alashan wapiti. Still, due to the insufficient genetic material that rejects monophyly of C. canadensis, some researchers consider it premature to include the Manchurian wapiti as a true subspecies of wapiti, and that it likely needs to be elevated to its own species, C. xanthopygus. The Chinese forms (the Sichuan deer, Kansu red deer, and Tibetan red deer) also belong to the wapiti, and were not distinguishable from each other by mitochondrial DNA studies. These Chinese subspecies are sometimes treated as a distinct species, namely the Central Asian red deer (Cervus hanglu), which also includes the Kashmir stag.
Characteristics
Elk have thick bodies with slender legs and short tails. They have a shoulder height of 0.75–1.5 m (2 ft 6 in – 4 ft 11 in) with a nose-to-tail length of 1.6–2.7 m (5 ft 3 in – 8 ft 10 in). Males are larger and weigh 178–497 kg (392–1,096 lb) while females weigh 171–292 kg (377–644 lb). The largest of the subspecies is the Roosevelt elk (C. c. roosevelti), found west of the Cascade Range in the U.S. states of California, Oregon and Washington, and in the Canadian province of British Columbia. Roosevelt elk have been introduced into Alaska, where the largest males are estimated to weigh up to 600 kg (1,300 lb). More typically, male Roosevelt elk weigh around 318 to 499 kg (701 to 1,100 lb), while females weigh 261 to 283 kg (575 to 624 lb). Male tule elk weigh 204–318 kg (450–701 lb) while females weigh 170–191 kg (375–421 lb). The whole weights of adult male Manitoban elk range from 288 to 478 kilograms (635 to 1,054 lb). Females have a mean weight of 275 kilograms (606 lb). The elk is the second largest extant species of deer, after the moose.
Antlers are made of bone, which can grow at a rate of 2.5 centimeters (0.98 in) per day. While actively growing, a soft layer of highly vascularized skin known as velvet covers and protects them. This is shed in the summer when the antlers have fully developed. Bull elk typically have around six tines on each antler. The Siberian and North American elk carry the largest antlers while the Altai wapiti has the smallest. Roosevelt bull antlers can weigh 18 kg (40 lb). The formation and retention of antlers are testosterone-driven. In late winter and early spring, the testosterone level drops, which causes the antlers to shed.

During the fall, elk grow a thicker coat of hair, which helps to insulate them during the winter. Both male and female North American elk grow thin neck manes; females of other subspecies may not. By early summer, the heavy winter coat has been shed. Elk are known to rub against trees and other objects to help remove hair from their bodies. All elk have small and clearly defined rump patches with short tails. They have different coloration based on the seasons and types of habitats, with gray or lighter coloration prevalent in the winter and a more reddish, darker coat in the summer. Subspecies living in arid climates tend to have lighter colored coats than do those living in forests. Most have lighter yellow-brown to orange-brown coats in contrast to dark brown hair on the head, neck, and legs during the summer. Forest-adapted Manchurian and Alaskan wapitis have red or reddish-brown coats with less contrast between the body coat and the rest of the body during the summer months. Calves are born spotted, as is common with many deer species, and lose them by the end of summer. Adult Manchurian wapiti may retain a few orange spots on the back of their summer coats until they are older. This characteristic has also been observed in the forest-adapted European red deer.
Behavior and ecology
Elk are among the most gregarious deer species. During the summer group size can reach 400 individuals. For most of the year, adult males and females are segregated into different herds. Female herds are larger while bulls form small groups and may even travel alone. Young bulls may associate with older bulls or female groups. Male and female herds come together during the mating season, which may begin in late August. Males try to intimidate rivals by vocalizing and displaying with their antlers. If neither bull backs down, they engage in antler wrestling, sometimes sustaining serious injuries.

Bulls have a loud, high-pitched, whistle-like vocalization known as bugling, which advertise the male's fitness over great distances. Unusual for a vocalization produced by a large animal, buglings can reach a frequency of 4000 Hz. This is achieved by blowing air from the glottis through the nasal cavities. Elk can produce deeper pitched (150 Hz) sounds using the larynx. Cows produce an alarm bark to alert other members of the herd to danger, while calves will produce a high-pitched scream when attacked.
Reproduction and life cycle
Female elk have a short estrus cycle of only a day or two, and matings usually involve a dozen or more attempts. By the autumn of their second year, females can produce one and, very rarely, two offspring. Reproduction is most common when cows weigh at least 200 kilograms (440 lb). Dominant bulls follow groups of cows during the rut from August into early winter. A bull will defend his harem of 20 cows or more from competing bulls and predators. Bulls also dig holes in the ground called wallows, in which they urinate and roll their bodies. A male elk's urethra points upward so that urine is sprayed almost at a right angle to the penis. The urine soaks into their hair and gives them a distinct smell which attracts cows.

A bull interacts with cows in his harem in two ways: herding and courtship. When a female wanders too far away from the harem's range, the male will rush ahead of her, block her path and aggressively rush her back to the harem. Herding behavior is accompanied by a stretched out and lowered neck and the antlers laid back. A bull may get violent and hit the cow with his antlers. During courtship, the bull is more peaceful and approaches her with his head and antlers raised. The male signals his intention to test the female for sexual receptivity by flicking his tongue. If not ready, a cow will lower her head and weave from side to side while opening and closing her mouth. The bull will stop in response in order not to scare her. Otherwise, the bull will copiously lick the female and then mount her.
Younger, less dominant bulls, known as "spike bulls", because their antlers have not yet forked, will harass unguarded cows. These bulls are impatient and will not perform any courtship rituals and will continue to pursue a female even when she signals him to stop. As such, they are less reproductively successful, and a cow may stay close to the big bull to avoid harassment. Dominant bulls are intolerant of spike bulls and will chase them away from their harems.

The gestation period is eight to nine months and the offspring weigh around 16 kilograms (35 lb). When the females are near to giving birth, they tend to isolate themselves from the main herd, and will remain isolated until the calf is large enough to escape predators. Calves are born spotted, as is common with many deer species, and they lose their spots by the end of summer. After two weeks, calves are able to join the herd, and are fully weaned at two months of age. Elk calves are as large as an adult white-tailed deer by the time they are six months old. Elk will leave their natal (birth) ranges before they are three years old. Males disperse more often than females, as adult cows are more tolerant of female offspring from previous years. Elk live 20 years or more in captivity but average 10 to 13 years in the wild. In some subspecies that suffer less predation, they may live an average of 15 years in the wild.
Migration
As is true for many species of deer, especially those in mountainous regions, elk migrate into areas of higher altitude in the spring, following the retreating snows, and the opposite direction in the fall. Hunting pressure impacts migration and movement. During the winter, they favor wooded areas for the greater availability of food to eat. Elk do not appear to benefit from thermal cover. The Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem elk herds comprise as many as 40,000 individuals. During the spring and fall, they take part in the longest elk migration in the continental U.S., traveling as much as 168 mi (270 km) between summer and winter ranges. The Teton herd consists of between 9,000 and 13,000 elk and they spend winters on the National Elk Refuge, having migrated south from the southern portions of Yellowstone National Park and west from the Shoshone and Bridger–Teton National Forests.
Diet
Elk are ruminants and therefore have four-chambered stomachs. Unlike white-tailed deer and moose, which are chiefly browsers, elk are similar to cattle in that they are primarily grazers. But like other deer, they also browse. Elk have a tendency to do most of their feeding in the mornings and evenings, seeking sheltered areas in between feedings to digest. Their diets vary somewhat depending on the season, with native grasses being a year-round supplement, tree bark (e.g. cedar, wintergreen, eastern hemlock, sumac, jack pine, red maple, staghorn, and basswood) being consumed in winter, and sedges, forbs, and tree sprouts during the summer. Favorites of the elk include dandelions, aster, hawkweed, violets, clover, and the occasional mushroom. Elk consume an average of 9.1 kilograms (20 lb) of vegetation daily. Particularly fond of aspen sprouts which rise in the spring, elk have had some impact on aspen groves which have been declining in some regions where elk exist. Range and wildlife managers conduct surveys of elk pellet groups to monitor populations and resource use.
Research in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem has found that supplemental feeding of concentrated alfalfa pellets leads to significant alterations in the elks' microbiome. The elk gut microbiome is typically characterized by a diverse community of bacteria specialized in breaking down complex plant fibers and cellulose, whereas the supplementally fed gut microbiome may have less fiber-digesting bacteria. Therefore, transitioning from natural foraging to concentrated alfalfa pellets can cause changes in the gut microbiome that might affect the elk's ability to efficiently digest their natural diet or could potentially lead to imbalances that affect overall health.
Predators and defensive tactics
Predators of elk include wolves, coyotes, brown and black bears, cougars, and Siberian tigers. Coyote packs mostly prey on elk calves, though they can sometimes take a winter- or disease-weakened adult. In the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, which includes Yellowstone National Park, bears are the most significant predators of calves while healthy bulls have never been recorded to be killed by bears and such encounters can be fatal for bears. The killing of cows in their prime is more likely to affect population growth than the killing of bulls or calves.
Elk may avoid predation by switching from grazing to browsing. Grazing puts an elk in the compromising situation of being in an open area with its head down, leaving it unable to see what is going on in the surrounding area. Living in groups also lessens the risk of an individual falling to predation. Large bull elk are less vulnerable and can afford to wander alone, while cows stay in larger groups for protection for their calves. Bulls are more vulnerable to predation by wolves in late winter, after they have been weakened by months of chasing females and fighting. Males that have recently lost their antlers are more likely to be preyed upon.
Parasites and disease
At least 53 species of protist and animal parasites have been identified in elk. Most of these parasites seldom lead to significant mortality among wild or captive elk. Parelaphostrongylus tenuis (brainworm or meningeal worm) is a parasitic nematode known to affect the spinal cord and brain tissue of elk and other species, leading to death. The definitive host is the white-tailed deer, in which it normally has no ill effects. Snails and slugs, the intermediate hosts, can be inadvertently consumed by elk during grazing. The liver fluke Fascioloides magna and the nematode Dictyocaulus viviparus are also commonly found parasites that can be fatal to elk.

Chronic wasting disease, transmitted by a misfolded protein known as a prion, affects the brain tissue in elk, and has been detected throughout their range in North America. First documented in the late 1960s in mule deer, the disease has affected elk on game farms and in the wild in a number of regions. Elk that have contracted the disease begin to show weight loss, changes in behavior, increased watering needs, excessive salivation and urinating and difficulty swallowing, and at an advanced stage, the disease leads to death. No risks to humans have been documented, nor has the disease been demonstrated to pose a threat to domesticated cattle. In 2002, South Korea banned the importation of elk antler velvet due to concerns about chronic wasting disease.
The Gram-negative bacterial disease brucellosis occasionally affects elk in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, the only place in the U.S. where the disease is still known to exist, though this can extend out to the Bighorn Mountains. In domesticated cattle, brucellosis causes infertility, abortions, and reduced milk production. It is transmitted to humans as undulant fever, producing influenza-like symptoms that may last for years. Though bison are more likely to transmit the disease to other animals, elk inadvertently transmitted brucellosis to horses in Wyoming and cattle in Idaho. Researchers are attempting to eradicate the disease through vaccinations and herd-management measures, which are expected to be successful. Nevertheless, research has been ongoing since 2002, and a successful vaccine has yet to be developed as of 2016.
A recent necropsy study of captive elk in Pennsylvania attributed the cause of death in 33 of 65 cases to either gastrointestinal parasites (21 cases, primarily Eimeria sp. and Ostertagia sp.) or bacterial infections (12 cases, mostly pneumonia).
Elk hoof disease was first noticed in the state of Washington in the late 1990s in the Cowlitz River basin, with sporadic reports of deformed hooves. Since then, the disease has spread rapidly with increased sightings throughout southwest Washington and into Oregon. The disease is characterised by deformed, broken, or missing hooves and leads to severe lameness in elk. The primary cause is not known, but it is associated with treponeme bacteria, which are known to cause digital dermatitis in commercial livestock. The mode of transmission is also not known, but it appears to be highly contagious among elk. Studies are being undertaken by government departments to determine how to halt or eliminate the disease.
Distribution and status
The elk ranges from central Asia through to Siberia and east Asia and in North America. They can be found in open deciduous woodlands, boreal forests, upland moors, mountainous areas and grasslands. The International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) list the species as least-concern species. The habitat of Siberian elk in Asia is similar to that of the Rocky Mountain subspecies in North America. During the Late Pleistocene their range was much more extensive, being distributed across Eurasia, with remains being found as far west as France. These populations are most closely related to modern Asian populations of the elk. Their range collapsed at the start of the Holocene, possibly because they were specialized to cold periglacial tundra-steppe habitat. When this environment was replaced largely by closed forest the red deer might have outcompeted the elk. Relictual populations survived into the early Holocene (until around 3000 years ago) in southern Sweden and the Alps, where the environment remained favorable. Elk were also present in the early Holocene of central Alaska, where it was the main hunted animal along with bison, and survived in Yukon until around 1400 BP (550 AD).
Introductions and reintroductions
As of 2014, population figures for all North American elk subspecies were around one million. Prior to the European colonization of North America, there were an estimated 10 million on the continent.
There are many past and ongoing examples of reintroduction into areas of the US. Elk were reintroduced in Michigan in 1918 after extirpation there in 1875. The Rocky Mountain elk subspecies was reintroduced by hunter-conservation organizations into the Appalachian region of the U.S. where the now extinct eastern elk once lived. They were reintroduced to Pennsylvania beginning in 1913 and throughout the mid-20th Century, and now remain at a stable population of approximately 1,400 individuals. Since the late 1990s, they were reintroduced and recolonized in the states of Wisconsin, Kentucky, North Carolina, Tennessee, Georgia, Virginia and West Virginia. In the state of Kentucky, the elk population in 2022 had increased to over 15,000 animals. In 2016, a male elk, likely from the Smoky Mountains population in western North Carolina, was sighted in South Carolina for the first time in nearly 300 years. Once locally extinct, dispersing elk are now regularly spotted in Iowa, although a wild population has not yet established. Since 2015, elk have also been reintroduced in a number of other states, including Missouri, and introduced to the islands of Etolin and Afognak in Alaska. Reintroduction of the elk into Ontario began in the early 20th century and is ongoing with limited success.
Elk and red deer were introduced to Argentina in the early 20th century. There they are now considered an invasive species, encroaching on Argentinian ecosystems where they compete for food with the indigenous Chilean huemul and other herbivores. This negative impact on native animal species has led the IUCN to identify the elk as one of the world's 100 worst invaders.
The introduction of deer to New Zealand began in the middle of the 19th century, and current populations are primarily European red deer, with only 15 percent being elk. In 1905 18 American wapiti were released in George Sound in the Fiordland National Park. In 1949 the New Zealand American Fiordland Expedition was undertaken to study the descendants of this release. There is significant hybridization of elk with red deer. These deer have had an adverse impact on forest regeneration of some plant species, as they consume more palatable species, which are replaced with those that are less favored by the elk. The long-term impact will be an alteration of the types of plants and trees found, and in other animal and plant species dependent upon them. As in Chile and Argentina, the IUCN has declared that red deer and elk populations in New Zealand are an invasive species.
U.S. states by estimated elk populationCultural references
Elk have played an important role in the cultural history of a number of peoples. Neolithic petroglyphs from Asia depict antler-less female elk, which have been interpreted as symbolizing life and sustenance. They were also frequently overlaid with boats and associated with rivers, suggesting they also represented paths to the underworld. Petroglyphs of elk were carved into cliffs by the Ancestral Puebloans of the southwestern U.S. hundreds of years ago. The elk was of particular importance to the Lakota and played a spiritual role in their society. The male elk was admired for its ability to attract mates, and Lakota men will play a courting flute imitating a bugling elk to attract women. Men used elks' antlers as love charms and wore clothes decorated with elk images.
The Rocky Mountain elk is the official state animal of Utah. An image of an elk and a moose appear on the state seal and flag of Michigan. The Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks (B.P.O.E.) chose the elk as its namesake because a number of its attributes seemed appropriate for cultivation by members of the fraternity. Jewel-encrusted, gold-mounted elk teeth are prized possessions of many members of the B.P.O.E.
Commercial uses
Although the 2006 National Survey from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service does not provide breakdown figures for each game species, hunting of wild elk is most likely the primary economic impact.
While elk are not generally harvested for meat production on a large scale, some restaurants offer the meat as a specialty item and it is also available in some grocery stores. The meat is higher in protein and lower in fat and cholesterol than beef, pork, and chicken. Elk meat is a good source of iron, phosphorus and zinc.
A male elk can produce 10 to 11 kilograms (22 to 24 lb) of antler velvet annually and on ranches in the United States, Canada and New Zealand, it is collected and sold to markets in East Asia, where it is used in medicine. Some cultures consider antler velvet to be an aphrodisiac. However, consuming velvet from elk in North America may be risky since velvet from animals infected with chronic wasting disease may contain prions that could result in a human getting variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease.
Antlers are also used in artwork, furniture and other novelty items. All Asian subspecies, along with other deer, have been raised for their antlers in central and eastern Asia by Han Chinese, Turkic peoples, Tungusic peoples, Mongolians, and Koreans. Elk farms are relatively common in North America and New Zealand. Native Americans have used elk hides for tepee covering, clothing and footwear.
Since 1967, the Boy Scouts of America have assisted employees at the National Elk Refuge in Wyoming by collecting the antlers which are shed each winter. They are then auctioned, with 80% of the proceeds returned to the refuge. In 2010, 2,520 kilograms (5,560 lb) of antlers were auctioned, which brought in over $46,000.


The elk (or wapiti, Cervus canadensis) is a large antlered mammal within the deer family.
Elk may also refer to:
Wildlife
Eurasian elk or moose (Alces alces), the largest extant species in the deer family
Irish elk (Megaloceros giganteus, extinct), one of the largest deer that ever lived
Whooper swan or elk, a large Northern Hemisphere swan
Arts and entertainment
Elk (.hack), a character in the .hack alternative history franchise
Elk (album), 2005, by Inga Liljeström
Elk (Milwaukee sculpture), a 1901 public artwork
E L K, èlk or ELK, Australian hip hop artist on the Playback 808 label
Thompson Elk Fountain, an outdoor fountain in Portland, Oregon, by Roland Hinton Perry
PlacesPoland
Ełk, a town in northeastern Poland
Ełk County
Gmina Ełk
Diocese of Ełk
Ełk (hamlet)
Ełk, river in Poland
Ełk Lake
Ełk Narrow Gauge Railway
United States
Elk, Fresno County, California
Elk, Mendocino County, California
Elk, Kansas
Elk, Ohio
Elk City, Oklahoma
Elk, Washington
Elk, West Virginia
Elk, Wisconsin
Technology
Extension Language Kit, an implementation of the Scheme programming language
ELK stack, a technology stack composed of Elasticsearch, Logstash, and Kibana, now called Elastic Stack
Acorn Electron, nicknamed "Elk", an 8-bit microcomputer produced in the 1980s by British company Acorn Computers
Transportation
Elk, a locomotive of the South Devon Railway Eagle class
Elk (steam tug), formerly operated on Puget Sound
Elk (sternwheeler 1857), a steamboat
Other uses
Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks
Elk (surname)
Elk Mountains (Colorado)
Elk v. Wilkins, a United States Supreme Court case


The sperm whale or cachalot (Physeter macrocephalus) is the largest of the toothed whales and the largest toothed predator. It is the only living member of the genus Physeter and one of three extant species in the sperm whale superfamily Physeteroidea, along with the pygmy sperm whale and dwarf sperm whale of the genus Kogia.
The sperm whale is a pelagic mammal with a worldwide range, and will migrate seasonally for feeding and breeding. Females and young males live together in groups, while mature males (bulls) live solitary lives outside of the mating season. The females cooperate to protect and nurse their young. Females give birth every four to twenty years and care for the calves for more than a decade. A mature, healthy sperm whale has no natural predators, although calves and weakened adults are sometimes killed by pods of orcas.
Mature males average 16 metres (52 ft) in length, with the head representing up to one-third of the animal's length. Plunging to 2,250 metres (7,380 ft), it is the third deepest diving mammal, exceeded only by the southern elephant seal and Cuvier's beaked whale. The sperm whale uses echolocation and vocalization with source level as loud as 236 decibels (re 1 μPa m) underwater, the loudest of any animal. It has the largest brain on Earth, more than five times heavier than a human's. Sperm whales can live 70 years or more.
Sperm whales' heads are filled with a waxy substance called "spermaceti" (sperm oil), from which the whale derives its name. Spermaceti was a prime target of the whaling industry and was sought after for use in oil lamps, lubricants, and candles. Ambergris, a solid waxy waste product sometimes present in its digestive system, is still highly valued as a fixative in perfumes, among other uses. Beachcombers look out for ambergris as flotsam. Sperm whaling was a major industry in the 19th century, depicted in the novel Moby-Dick. The species is protected by the International Whaling Commission moratorium, and is listed as vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature.
Taxonomy and namingEtymology
The name "sperm whale" is a clipping of "spermaceti whale". Spermaceti, originally mistakenly identified as the whales' semen, is the semi-liquid, waxy substance found within the whale's head.
(See "Spermaceti organ and melon" below.)
The sperm whale is also known as the "cachalot", which is thought to derive from the archaic French for 'tooth' or 'big teeth', as preserved for example in the word caishau in the Gascon dialect (a word of either Romance
or Basque
origin).
The etymological dictionary of Corominas says the origin is uncertain, but it suggests that it comes from the Vulgar Latin cappula 'sword hilts'. The word cachalot came to English via French from Spanish or Portuguese cachalote, perhaps from Galician/Portuguese cachola 'big head'.
The term is retained in the Russian word for the animal, kashalot (кашалот), as well as in many other languages.
The scientific genus name Physeter comes from the Greek physētēr (φυσητήρ), meaning 'blowpipe, blowhole (of a whale)', or – as a pars pro toto – 'whale'.
The specific name macrocephalus is Latinized from the Greek makroképhalos (μακροκέφαλος 'big-headed'), from makros (μακρός) + kephalē (κεφαλή).
Its synonymous specific name catodon means 'down-tooth', from the Greek elements cat(a)- ('below') and odṓn ('tooth'); so named because it has visible teeth only in its lower jaw. (See "Jaws and teeth" below.)
Another synonym australasianus ('Australasian') was applied to sperm whales in the Southern Hemisphere.
Taxonomy
The sperm whale belongs to the order Cetartiodactyla, the order containing all cetaceans and even-toed ungulates. It is a member of the unranked clade Cetacea, with all the whales, dolphins, and porpoises, and further classified into Odontoceti, containing all the toothed whales and dolphins. It is the sole extant species of its genus, Physeter, in the family Physeteridae. Two species of the related extant genus Kogia, the pygmy sperm whale Kogia breviceps and the dwarf sperm whale K. sima, are placed either in this family or in the family Kogiidae. In some taxonomic schemes the families Kogiidae and Physeteridae are combined as the superfamily Physeteroidea (see the separate entry on the sperm whale family).
Swedish ichthyologist Peter Artedi described it as Physeter catodon in his 1738 work Genera piscium, from the report of a beached specimen in Orkney in 1693 and two beached in the Netherlands in 1598 and 1601. The 1598 specimen was near Berkhey.
The sperm whale is one of the species originally described by Carl Linnaeus in his landmark 1758 10th edition of Systema Naturae. He recognised four species in the genus Physeter. Experts soon realised that just one such species exists, although there has been debate about whether this should be named P. catodon or P. macrocephalus, two of the names used by Linnaeus. Both names are still used, although most recent authors now accept macrocephalus as the valid name, limiting catodon's status to a lesser synonym. Until 1974, the species was generally known as P. catodon. In that year, however, Dutch zoologists Antonius M. Husson and Lipke Holthuis proposed that the correct name should be P. macrocephalus, the second name in the genus Physeter published by Linnaeus concurrently with P. catodon.
This proposition was based on the grounds that the names were synonyms published simultaneously, and, therefore, the ICZN Principle of the First Reviser should apply. In this instance, it led to the choice of P. macrocephalus over P. catodon, a view re-stated in Holthuis, 1987. This has been adopted by most subsequent authors, although Schevill (1986 and 1987) argued that macrocephalus was published with an inaccurate description and that therefore only the species catodon was valid, rendering the principle of "First Reviser" inapplicable. The most recent version of ITIS has altered its usage from P. catodon to P. macrocephalus, following L. B. Holthuis and more recent (2008) discussions with relevant experts. Furthermore, The Taxonomy Committee of the Society for Marine Mammalogy, the largest international association of marine mammal scientists in the world, officially uses Physeter macrocephalus when publishing their definitive list of marine mammal species.
BiologyExternal appearance
The sperm whale is the largest toothed whale and is among the most sexually dimorphic of all cetaceans. Both sexes are about the same size at birth, but mature males are typically 30% to 50% longer and three times as massive as females.
Newborn sperm whales are usually between 3.5 and 4.5 meters (11 and 15 ft) long. Female sperm whales are sexually mature at 8 to 9 meters (26 to 30 ft) in length, whilst males are sexually mature at 11 to 12 meters (36 to 39 ft). Female sperm whales are physically mature at about 10.6 to 11 meters (35 to 36 ft) in length and generally do not achieve lengths greater than 12 metres (39 ft). The largest female sperm whale measured up to 12.3–12.5 meters (40–41 ft) long, and an individual of such size would have weighed about 17 to 24 tonnes (19 to 26 short tons). Male sperm whales are physically mature at about 15 to 16 meters (49 to 52 ft) in length, and larger males can generally achieve 18 to 19 meters (59 to 62 ft). A male sperm whale measuring 18 meters (59 ft) in length is estimated to have weighed 57 tonnes (56 long tons; 63 short tons). By contrast, the second largest toothed whale (Baird's beaked whale) measures up to 12.8–13 meters (42–43 ft) and weighs up to 14 tonnes (15 short tons).
There are occasional reports of individual sperm whales achieving even greater lengths, with some historical claims reaching or exceeding 80 feet (24 m). One example is the whale that sank the Essex (one of the incidents behind Moby-Dick), which was claimed to be 25.9 metres (85 ft). However, there is disagreement as to the accuracy of some of these claims, which are often considered exaggerations or as being measured along the curves of the body. There are reports of individual females reaching much greater lengths, with a female captured in Trinidad in October 1925 measuring 17.6 metres (58 ft), but this suggests an error in sex determination or length measurement.
An individual measuring 20.7 metres (68 ft) was reported from a Soviet whaling fleet near the Kuril Islands in 1950 and is cited by some authors as the largest accurately measured. It has been estimated to weigh 80 tonnes (79 long tons; 88 short tons). In a review of size variation in marine megafauna, McClain and colleagues noted that the International Whaling Commission's data contained eight individuals larger than 20.7 metres (68 ft). The authors supported a 24-metre (79 ft) male from the South Pacific in 1933 as the largest recorded. However, sizes like these are rare, with 95% of recorded sperm whales below 15.85 metres (52.0 ft).
In 1853, one sperm whale was reported at 62 feet (19 m) in length, with a head measuring 20 feet (6.1 m). Large lower jawbones are held in the British Natural History Museum and the Oxford University Museum of Natural History, measuring 5 metres (16 ft) and 4.7 metres (15 ft), respectively. The blunt, square snout can reach up to 1.5 meters (5 ft) at the tip of the lower jaw.
The average size of sperm whales has decreased over the years, probably due to pressure from whaling. Another view holds that exploitation by overwhaling had virtually no effect on the size of the bull sperm whales, and their size may have actually increased in current times on the basis of density dependent effects. Old males taken at Solander Islands were recorded to be extremely large and unusually rich in blubbers.

The sperm whale's unique body is unlikely to be confused with any other species. The sperm whale's distinctive shape comes from its very large, block-shaped head, which can be one-quarter to one-third of the animal's length. The S-shaped blowhole is located very close to the front of the head and shifted to the whale's left. This gives rise to a distinctive bushy, forward-angled spray.
The sperm whale's flukes (tail lobes) are triangular and very thick. Proportionally, they are larger than that of any other cetacean, and are very flexible. The whale lifts its flukes high out of the water as it begins a feeding dive. It has a series of ridges on the back's caudal third instead of a dorsal fin. The largest ridge was called the 'hump' by whalers, and can be mistaken for a dorsal fin because of its shape and size.
The male sperm whale, which was stranded in 1997 and is estimated to be 15.2 metres (50 ft) long, weighing 38.5 tonnes (37.9 long tons; 42.4 short tons) and at least 42 years old, has a penis that is 1.56 metres (5.1 ft) long and tapers to about 70 centimetres (28 in) at the tip. The Icelandic Phallological Museum houses a sperm whale penis specimen measuring 1.7 metres (5.6 ft) long and weighing 70 kilograms (154 lb). This specimen is only the tip; the entire organ, if intact, would have been about 5 metres (16 ft) long and weighed about 400 kilograms (880 lb).
In contrast to the smooth skin of most large whales, its back skin is usually wrinkly and has been likened to a prune by whale-watching enthusiasts. Albinos have been reported.
Skeleton
The ribs are bound to the spine by flexible cartilage, which allows the ribcage to collapse rather than snap under high pressure. While sperm whales are well adapted to diving, repeated dives to great depths have long-term effects. Bones show the same avascular necrosis that signals decompression sickness in humans. Older skeletons showed the most extensive damage, whereas calves showed no damage. This damage may indicate that sperm whales are susceptible to decompression sickness, and sudden surfacing could be lethal to them.

Like that of all cetaceans, the spine of the sperm whale has reduced zygapophysial joints, of which the remnants are modified and are positioned higher on the vertebral dorsal spinous process, hugging it laterally, to prevent extensive lateral bending and facilitate more dorso-ventral bending. These evolutionary modifications make the spine more flexible but weaker than the spines of terrestrial vertebrates.

Like many cetaceans, the sperm whale has a vestigial pelvis that is not connected to the spine. However, recent research suggests that these bones are actually functional and are targeted by sexual selection to control reproductive muscles.
Like that of other toothed whales, the skull of the sperm whale is asymmetrical so as to aid echolocation. Sound waves that strike the whale from different directions will not be channeled in the same way. Within the basin of the cranium, the openings of the bony narial tubes (from which the nasal passages spring) are skewed towards the left side of the skull.
Jaws and teeth
The sperm whale's lower jaw is very narrow and underslung. The sperm whale has 18 to 26 teeth on each side of its lower jaw which fit into sockets in the upper jaw. The teeth are cone-shaped and weigh up to 1 kilogram (2.2 lb) each. The teeth are functional, but do not appear to be necessary for capturing or eating squid, as well-fed animals have been found without teeth or even with deformed jaws. One hypothesis is that the teeth are used in aggression between males. Mature males often show scars which seem to be caused by the teeth. Rudimentary teeth are also present in the upper jaw, but these rarely emerge into the mouth. Analyzing the teeth is the preferred method for determining a whale's age. Like tree rings, the teeth build distinct layers of cementum and dentine as they grow.
Brain
The sperm whale brain is the largest known of any modern or extinct animal, weighing on average about 7.08 kilograms (15.6 lb) (with the smallest known weighing 6.4 kilograms (14 lb) and the largest known weighing 9.2 kilograms (20 lb)), more than five times heavier than a human brain, and has a volume of about 8,000 cm3. Although larger brains generally correlate with higher intelligence, it is not the only factor. Elephants and dolphins also have larger brains than humans. The sperm whale has a lower encephalization quotient than many other whale and dolphin species, lower than that of non-human anthropoid apes, and much lower than that of humans.
The sperm whale's cerebrum is the largest in all mammalia, both in absolute and relative terms. The olfactory system is reduced, suggesting that the sperm whale has a poor sense of taste and smell. By contrast, the auditory system is enlarged. The pyramidal tract is poorly developed, reflecting the reduction of its limbs.
Biological systems
The sperm whale respiratory system has adapted to cope with drastic pressure changes when diving. The flexible ribcage allows lung collapse, reducing nitrogen intake, and metabolism can decrease to conserve oxygen. Between dives, the sperm whale surfaces to breathe for about eight minutes before diving again. Odontoceti (toothed whales) breathe air at the surface through a single, S-shaped blowhole, which is extremely skewed to the left. Sperm whales spout (breathe) 3–5 times per minute at rest, increasing to 6–7 times per minute after a dive. The blow is a noisy, single stream that rises up to 2 metres (6.6 ft) or more above the surface and points forward and left at a 45° angle. On average, females and juveniles blow every 12.5 seconds before dives, while large males blow every 17.5 seconds before dives. Sperm whales can swim at speeds of up to 7.0 meters per second (25 km/h; 16 mph). A sperm whale killed 160 km (100 mi) south of Durban, South Africa, after a 1-hour, 50-minute dive was found with two dogfish (Scymnodon sp.), usually found at the sea floor, in its belly.
The sperm whale has the longest intestinal system in the world, exceeding 300 m (980 ft) in larger specimens. The sperm whale has a multi-chambered stomach that is similar to ruminants'. The first chamber secretes no gastric juices and has very thick muscular walls to crush the food (since whales cannot chew) and resist the claw and sucker attacks of swallowed squid. The second chamber is larger and is where digestion takes place. Undigested squid beaks accumulate in the second chamber – as many as 18,000 have been found in some dissected specimens. Most squid beaks are vomited by the whale, but some occasionally make it to the hindgut. Such beaks precipitate the formation of ambergris.

In 1959, the heart of a 22 metric-ton (24 short-ton) male taken by whalers was measured to be 116 kilograms (256 lb), about 0.5% of its total mass. The circulatory system has a number of specific adaptations for the aquatic environment. The diameter of the aortic arch increases as it leaves the heart. This bulbous expansion acts as a windkessel, ensuring a steady blood flow as the heart rate slows during diving. The arteries that leave the aortic arch are positioned symmetrically. There is no costocervical artery. There is no direct connection between the internal carotid artery and the vessels of the brain. Their circulatory system has adapted to dive at great depths, as much as 2,250 metres (7,382 ft) for up to 120 minutes. More typical dives are around 400 metres (1,310 ft) and 35 minutes in duration. Myoglobin, which stores oxygen in muscle tissue, is much more abundant than in terrestrial animals. The blood has a high density of red blood cells, which contain oxygen-carrying haemoglobin. The oxygenated blood can be directed towards only the brain and other essential organs when oxygen levels deplete. The spermaceti organ may also play a role by adjusting buoyancy (see below). The arterial retia mirabilia are more extensive and larger than those of any other cetacean.
SensesSpermaceti organ and melon
Atop the whale's skull is positioned a large complex of organs filled with a liquid mixture of fats and waxes called spermaceti. The purpose of this complex is to generate powerful and focused clicking sounds, the existence of which was proven by Valentine Worthington and William Schevill when a recording was produced on a research vessel in May 1959. The sperm whale uses these sounds for echolocation and communication.
The spermaceti organ is like a large barrel of spermaceti. Its surrounding wall, known as the case, is extremely tough and fibrous. The case can hold within it up to 1,900 litres of spermaceti. It is proportionately larger in males. This oil is a mixture of triglycerides and wax esters. It has been suggested that it is homologous to the dorsal bursa organ found in dolphins. The proportion of wax esters in the spermaceti organ increases with the age of the whale: 38–51% in calves, 58–87% in adult females, and 71–94% in adult males. The spermaceti at the core of the organ has a higher wax content than the outer areas. The speed of sound in spermaceti is 2,684 m/s (at 40 kHz, 36 °C), making it nearly twice as fast as in the oil in a dolphin's melon.
Below the spermaceti organ lies the "junk" which consists of compartments of spermaceti separated by cartilage. It is analogous to the melon found in other toothed whales. The structure of the junk redistributes physical stress across the skull and may have evolved to protect the head during ramming.
Running through the head are two air passages. The left passage runs alongside the spermaceti organ and goes directly to the blowhole, whilst the right passage runs underneath the spermaceti organ and passes air through a pair of phonic lips and into the distal sac at the very front of the nose. The distal sac is connected to the blowhole and the terminus of the left passage. When the whale is submerged, it can close the blowhole, and air that passes through the phonic lips can circulate back to the lungs. The sperm whale, unlike other odontocetes, has only one pair of phonic lips, whereas all other toothed whales have two, and it is located at the front of the nose instead of behind the melon.
At the posterior end of this spermaceti complex is the frontal sac, which covers the concave surface of the cranium. The posterior wall of the frontal sac is covered with fluid-filled knobs, which are about 4–13 mm in diameter and separated by narrow grooves. The anterior wall is smooth. The knobbly surface reflects sound waves that come through the spermaceti organ from the phonic lips. The grooves between the knobs trap a film of air that is consistent whatever the orientation or depth of the whale, making it an excellent sound mirror.
The spermaceti organs may also help adjust the whale's buoyancy. It is hypothesized that before the whale dives, cold water enters the organ, and it is likely that the blood vessels constrict, reducing blood flow, and, hence, temperature. The wax therefore solidifies and reduces in volume. The increase in specific density generates a down force of about 392 newtons (88 lbf) and allows the whale to dive with less effort. During the hunt, oxygen consumption, together with blood vessel dilation, produces heat and melts the spermaceti, increasing its buoyancy and enabling easy surfacing. However, more recent work has found many problems with this theory including the lack of anatomical structures for the actual heat exchange. Another issue is that if the spermaceti does indeed cool and solidify, it would affect the whale's echolocation ability just when it needs it to hunt in the depths.
Herman Melville's fictional story Moby-Dick suggests that the "case" containing the spermaceti serves as a battering ram for use in fights between males. A few famous instances include the well-documented sinking of the ships Essex and Ann Alexander by attackers estimated to weigh only one-fifth as much as the ships. However, the hypothesis that the enlarged head of male sperm whales primarily functions as a weapon in intra-sex competition has been subject to significant criticism, and the rarity of records of head-butting fights between males raises questions about whether such behavior is sufficiently typical to drive strong sexual selection.
Eyes and vision
The sperm whale's eye does not differ greatly from those of other toothed whales except in size. It is the largest among the toothed whales, weighing about 170 g. It is overall ellipsoid in shape, compressed along the visual axis, measuring about 7×7×3 cm. The cornea is elliptical and the lens is spherical. The sclera is very hard and thick, roughly 1 cm anteriorly and 3 cm posteriorly. There are no ciliary muscles. The choroid is very thick and contains a fibrous tapetum lucidum. Like other toothed whales, the sperm whale can retract and protrude its eyes, thanks to a 2-cm-thick retractor muscle attached around the eye at the equator, but are unable to roll the eyes in their sockets.
According to Fristrup and Harbison (2002),
sperm whale's eyes afford good vision and sensitivity to light. They conjectured that sperm whales use vision to hunt squid, either by detecting silhouettes from below or by detecting bioluminescence. If sperm whales detect silhouettes, Fristrup and Harbison suggested that they hunt upside down, allowing them to use the forward parts of the ventral visual fields for binocular vision.
Sleeping
For some time researchers have been aware that pods of sperm whales may sleep for short periods, assuming a vertical position with their heads just below or at the surface, or head down. A 2008 study published in Current Biology recorded evidence that whales may sleep with both sides of the brain. It appears that some whales may fall into a deep sleep for about 7 percent of the time, most often between 6 p.m. and midnight.
Genetics
Sperm whales have 21 pairs of chromosomes (2n=42). The genome of live whales can be examined by recovering shed skin.
Vocalization complex
After Valentine Worthington and William E. Schevill confirmed the existence of sperm whale vocalization, further studies found that sperm whales are capable of emitting sounds at a source level of 236 decibels – making the sperm whale the loudest animal in the world.
Mechanism
When echolocating, the sperm whale emits a directionally focused beam of broadband clicks. Clicks are generated by forcing air through a pair of phonic lips (also known as "monkey lips" or "museau de singe") at the front end of the nose, just below the blowhole. The sound then travels backwards along the length of the nose through the spermaceti organ. Most of the sound energy is then reflected off the frontal sac at the cranium and into the melon, whose lens-like structure focuses it. Some of the sound will reflect back into the spermaceti organ and back towards the front of the whale's nose, where it will be reflected through the spermaceti organ a third time. This back and forth reflection which happens on the scale of a few milliseconds creates a multi-pulse click structure.
This multi-pulse click structure allows researchers to measure the whale's spermaceti organ using only the sound of its clicks. Because the interval between pulses of a sperm whale's click is related to the length of the sound producing organ, an individual whale's click is unique to that individual. However, if the whale matures and the size of the spermaceti organ increases, the tone of the whale's click will also change. The lower jaw is the primary reception path for the echoes. A continuous fat-filled canal transmits received sounds to the inner ear.
The source of the air forced through the phonic lips is the right nasal passage. While the left nasal passage opens to the blow hole, the right nasal passage has evolved to supply air to the phonic lips. It is thought that the nostrils of the land-based ancestor of the sperm whale migrated through evolution to their current functions, the left nostril becoming the blowhole and the right nostril becoming the phonic lips.
Air that passes through the phonic lips passes into the distal sac, then back down through the left nasal passage. This recycling of air allows the whale to continuously generate clicks for as long as it is submerged.
Vocalization types
The sperm whale's vocalizations are all based on clicking, described in four types: the usual echolocation, creaks, codas, and slow clicks.
The usual echolocation click type is used in searching for prey. A creak is a rapid series of high-frequency clicks that sounds somewhat like a creaky door hinge. It is typically used when homing in on prey.
Slow clicks are heard only in the presence of males (it is not certain whether females occasionally make them). Males make a lot of slow clicks in breeding grounds (74% of the time), both near the surface and at depth, which suggests they are primarily mating signals. Outside breeding grounds, slow clicks are rarely heard, and usually near the surface.
Codas
The most distinctive vocalizations are codas, which are short rhythmic sequences of clicks, mostly numbering 3–12 clicks, in stereotyped patterns. They are classified using variations in the number of clicks, rhythm, and tempo.
Codas are the result of vocal learning within a stable social group, and are made in the context of the whales' social unit. "The foundation of sperm whale society is the matrilineally based social unit of ten or so females and their offspring. The members of the unit travel together, suckle each others' infants, and babysit them while mothers make long deep dives to feed." Over 70% of a sperm whale's time is spent independently foraging; codas "could help whales reunite and reaffirm their social ties in between long foraging dives".
While nonidentity codas are commonly used in multiple different clans, some codas express clan identity, and denote different patterns of travel, foraging, and socializing or avoidance among clans. In particular, whales will not group with whales of another clan even though they share the same geographical area. Statistically, as the clans' ranges become more overlapped, the distinction in clan identity coda usage becomes more pronounced. Distinctive codas identify seven clans described among the approximately 150,000 female sperm whales in the Pacific Ocean, and there are another four clans in the Atlantic. As "arbitrary traits that function as reliable indicators of cultural group membership", clan identity codas act as symbolic markers that modulate interactions between individuals.
Individual identity in sperm whale vocalizations is an ongoing scientific issue, however. A distinction needs to be made between cues and signals. Human acoustic tools can distinguish individual whales by analyzing micro-characteristics of their vocalizations, and the whales can probably do the same. This does not prove that the whales deliberately use some vocalizations to signal individual identity in the manner of the signature whistles that bottlenose dolphins use as individual labels.
EcologyDistribution
Sperm whales are among the most cosmopolitan species. They prefer ice-free waters over 1,000 metres (3,300 ft) deep. Although both sexes range through temperate and tropical oceans and seas, only adult males populate higher latitudes. Among several regions, such as along coastal waters of southern Australia, sperm whales have been considered to be locally extinct.
They are relatively abundant from the poles to the equator and are found in all the oceans. They inhabit the Mediterranean Sea, but not the Black Sea, while their presence in the Red Sea is uncertain. The shallow entrances to both the Black Sea and the Red Sea may account for their absence. The Black Sea's lower layers are also anoxic and contain high concentrations of sulphur compounds such as hydrogen sulphide. The first ever sighting off the coast of Pakistan was made in 2017. The first ever record off the west coast of the Korean Peninsula (Yellow Sea) was made in 2005. followed by one near Ganghwa Island in 2009.
Populations are denser close to continental shelves and canyons. Sperm whales are usually found in deep, off-shore waters, but may be seen closer to shore, in areas where the continental shelf is small and drops quickly to depths of 310 to 920 metres (1,020 to 3,020 ft). Coastal areas with significant sperm whale populations include the Azores and Dominica. In east Asian waters, whales are also observed regularly in coastal waters in places such as the Commander and Kuril Islands, Shiretoko Peninsula which is one of few locations where sperm whales can be observed from shores, off Kinkasan, vicinity to Tokyo Bay and the Bōsō Peninsula to the Izu and the Izu Islands, the Volcano Islands, Yakushima and the Tokara Islands to the Ryukyu Islands, Taiwan, the Northern Mariana Islands, and so forth. Historical catch records suggest there could have been smaller aggression grounds in the Sea of Japan as well. Along the Korean Peninsula, the first confirmed observation within the Sea of Japan, eight animals off Guryongpo, was made in 2004 since after the last catches of five whales off Ulsan in 1911, In April 2025, a 10-year-old adult male, 15–20 meters (49–66 ft) long and weighing over 30 tonnes (33 short tons), was sighted at the Port of Gwangyang. while nine whales were observed in the East China Sea side of the peninsula in 1999.
Grown males are known to enter surprisingly shallow bays to rest (whales will be in a state of rest during these occasions). Unique, coastal groups have been reported from various areas around the globe, such as near Scotland's coastal waters, and the Shiretoko Peninsula, off Kaikōura, in Davao Gulf. Such coastal groups were more abundant in pre-whaling days.
Genetic analysis indicates that the world population of sperm whales originated in the Pacific Ocean from a population of about 10,000 animals around 100,000 years ago, when expanding ice caps blocked off their access to other seas. In particular, colonization of the Atlantic was revealed to have occurred multiple times during this expansion of their range.
Diet
Sperm whales usually dive between 300 and 800 metres (980 and 2,620 ft), and sometimes 1 to 2 kilometres (3,300 to 6,600 ft), in search of food. Such dives can last more than an hour. They feed on several species, notably the giant squid, but also the colossal squid, octopuses, and fish such as demersal rays and sharks, but their diet is mainly medium-sized squid. Sperm whales may also possibly prey upon swordfish on rare occasions. Some prey may be taken accidentally while eating other items. Most of what is known about deep-sea squid has been learned from specimens in captured sperm whale stomachs, although more recent studies analysed faeces.
One study, carried out around the Galápagos, found that squid from the genera Histioteuthis (62%), Ancistrocheirus (16%), and Octopoteuthis (7%) weighing between 12 and 650 grams (0.026 and 1.433 lb) were the most commonly taken. Battles between sperm whales and giant squid or colossal squid have never been observed by humans; however, white scars are believed to be caused by the large squid. One study published in 2010 collected evidence that suggests that female sperm whales may collaborate when hunting Humboldt squid. Tagging studies have shown that sperm whales hunt upside down at the bottom of their deep dives. It is suggested that the whales can see the squid silhouetted above them against the dim surface light.
An older study, examining whales captured by the New Zealand whaling fleet in the Cook Strait region, found a 1.69:1 ratio of squid to fish by weight. Sperm whales sometimes take sablefish and toothfish from long lines. Long-line fishing operations in the Gulf of Alaska complain that sperm whales take advantage of their fishing operations to eat desirable species straight off the line, sparing the whales the need to hunt. However, the amount of fish taken is very little compared to what the sperm whale needs per day. Video footage has been captured of a large male sperm whale "bouncing" a long line, to gain the fish. Sperm whales are believed to prey on the megamouth shark, a rare and large deep-sea species discovered in the 1970s. In one case, three sperm whales were observed attacking or playing with a megamouth.
Sperm whales have also been noted to feed on bioluminescent pyrosomes such as Pyrosoma atlanticum. It is thought that the foraging strategy of sperm whales for bioluminescent squids may also explain the presence of these light-emitting pyrosomes in the diet of the sperm whale.

The sharp beak of a consumed squid lodged in the whale's intestine may lead to the production of ambergris, analogous to the production of pearls in oysters. The irritation of the intestines caused by squid beaks stimulates the secretion of this lubricant-like substance.
Sperm whales are prodigious feeders and eat around 3% of their body weight per day.
Sperm whales hunt through echolocation. Their clicks are among the most powerful sounds in the animal kingdom (see above). It has been hypothesised that it can stun prey with its clicks. Experimental studies attempting to duplicate this effect have been unable to replicate the supposed injuries, casting doubt on this idea. One study showing that sound pressure levels on the squid are more than an order of magnitude below levels required for debilitation, and therefore, precluding acoustic
stunning to facilitate prey capture.
Sperm whales, as well as other large cetaceans, help fertilise the surface of the ocean by consuming nutrients in the depths and transporting those nutrients to the oceans' surface when they defecate, an effect known as the whale pump. This fertilises phytoplankton and other plants on the surface of the ocean and contributes to ocean productivity and the drawdown of atmospheric carbon.
Life cycle
Sperm whales can live 70 years or more. The oldest recorded living sperm whale was 77–80 years old. They are a prime example of a species that has been K-selected, meaning their reproductive strategy is associated with stable environmental conditions and comprises a low birth rate, significant parental aid to offspring, slow maturation, and high longevity.
How they choose mates has not been definitively determined. Bulls will fight with each other over females, and males will mate with multiple females, making them polygynous, but they do not dominate the group as in a harem. Bulls do not provide paternal care to their offspring but rather play a fatherly role to younger bulls to show dominance.
Recent studies have shown that associations between groups of males and females are temporary, and that associations between groups and individual males appear to be determined by female choice rather than male aggression. As if to support this, aggression between male sperm whales is rare within breeding grounds; only one case of male-male aggression was recorded over 11 years in a 40-year study around the Galapagos Islands, and no aggression was reported in a similar 20-year study off the Dominican Republic. Males do occasionally bear teeth marks, which could have occurred during intra-sex competition, but this raises the possibility that male sperm whale teeth marks may have evolved as a signal of male dominance rather than as a direct result of competition for females. However, observations may be rare because fights between males occur very quickly or under the water.
Females appear to reach sexual maturity around 6–13 years of age. Females appear to reach sexual maturity around age 9 on average and become fertile around age 10. However, the age of sexual maturity in females varies considerably across regions. Female sperm whales' reproductive capacity appears to decline steadily from the age of 10–14, then sharply after age 40. The oldest pregnant female ever recorded was 41 years old. Gestation requires 14 to 16 months, producing a single calf. Sexually mature females give birth once every 4 to 20 years (pregnancy rates were higher during the whaling era). Birth is a social event, as the mother and calf need others to protect them from predators. The other adults may jostle and bite the newborn in its first hours. Females reach their full size at about age 25-45.
Lactation proceeds for 19 to 42 months, but calves, rarely, may suckle up to 13 years. Like that of other whales, the sperm whale's milk has a higher fat content than that of terrestrial mammals: about 36%, compared to 4% in cow milk. This gives it a consistency similar to cottage cheese, which prevents it from dissolving in the water before the calf can drink it. It has an energy content of roughly 3,840 kcal/kg, compared to just 640 kcal/kg in cow milk. Calves may be allowed to suckle from females other than their mothers.
Males become sexually mature at 9–21 years. Upon reaching sexual maturity, males move to higher latitudes, where the water is colder and feeding is more productive. Females remain at lower latitudes. Males reach their full size at about age 50-60.
Social behaviourRelations within the species
Like elephants, females and their young live in matriarchal groups called pods, while bulls live apart. Bulls sometimes form loose bachelor groups with other males of similar age and size. As they grow older, they typically live solitary lives, only returning to the pod to socialize or to breed. Bulls have beached themselves together, suggesting a degree of cooperation which is not yet fully understood. The whales rarely, if ever, leave their group.
A social unit is a group of sperm whales who live and travel together over a period of years. Individuals rarely, if ever, join or leave a social unit. There is a huge variance in the size of social units. They are most commonly between six and nine individuals in size but can have more than twenty. Unlike orcas, sperm whales within a social unit show no significant tendency to associate with their genetic relatives. Females and calves spend about three-quarters of their time foraging and a quarter of their time socializing. Socializing usually takes place in the afternoon.
When sperm whales socialize, they emit complex patterns of clicks called codas. They will spend much of the time rubbing against each other. Tracking of diving whales suggests that groups engage in herding of prey, similar to bait balls created by other species, though the research needs to be confirmed by tracking the prey.
Relations with other species
The most common natural predator of sperm whales is the orca (killer whale), but pilot whales and false killer whales sometimes harass them. Orcas prey on target groups of females with young, usually making an effort to extract and kill a calf. The females will protect their calves or an injured adult by encircling them. They may face inwards with their tails out (the 'marguerite formation', named after the flower). The heavy and powerful tail of an adult whale is potentially capable of delivering lethal blows. Alternatively, they may face outwards (the 'heads-out formation'). Other than sperm whales, southern right whales had been observed to perform similar formations. However, formations in non-dangerous situations have been recorded as well. Early whalers exploited this behaviour, attracting a whole unit by injuring one of its members. Such a tactic is described in Moby-Dick: "Say you strike a Forty-barrel-bull—poor devil! all his comrades quit him. But strike a member of the harem school, and her companions swim around her with every token of concern, sometimes lingering so near her and so long, as themselves to fall a prey."If the killer whale pod is large, its members may sometimes be able to kill adult female sperm whales and can at least injure an entire pod of sperm whales. Bulls have no predators, and are believed to be too large, powerful and aggressive to be threatened by killer whales. Solitary bulls are known to interfere and come to the aid of vulnerable groups nearby. However, the bull sperm whale, when accompanying pods of female sperm whales and their calves as such, may be reportedly unable to effectively dissuade killer whales from their attacks on the group, although the killer whales may end the attack sooner when a bull is present.
At potential feeding sites, the killer whales may prevail over sperm whales even when outnumbered by the sperm whales. Some authors consider the killer whales "usually" behaviorally dominant over sperm whales but express that the two species are "fairly evenly matched", with the killer whales' greater aggression, more considerable biting force for their size and predatory prowess more than compensating for their smaller size. A 2013 study found male sperm whales changed their behavior in response to the orca sound playback by performing deep dives and reduced vocal activity. While several cases of orcas hunting bull sperm whales have been documented, none of these events were successful.
Sperm whales are not known for forging bonds with other species, but it was observed that a bottlenose dolphin with a spinal deformity had been accepted into a pod of sperm whales. They are known to swim alongside other cetaceans such as humpback, fin, minke, pilot, and killer whales on occasion. Sperm whales also engage in defensive defecation.
Parasites
Sperm whales can suffer from parasites.
Out of 35 sperm whales caught during the 1976–1977 Antarctic whaling season, all of them were infected by Anisakis physeteris (in their stomachs) and Phyllobothrium delphini (in their blubber).
Both whales with a placenta were infected with Placentonema gigantissima, potentially the largest nematode worm ever described.
Evolutionary historyFossil record
Although the fossil record is poor, several extinct genera have been assigned to the clade Physeteroidea, which includes the last common ancestor of the modern sperm whale, pygmy sperm whales, dwarf sperm whales, and extinct physeteroids. These fossils include Ferecetotherium, Idiorophus, Diaphorocetus, Aulophyseter, Orycterocetus, Scaldicetus, Placoziphius, Zygophyseter and Acrophyseter. Ferecetotherium, found in Azerbaijan and dated to the late Oligocene (about 28 to 23 million years ago), is the most primitive fossil that has been found, which possesses sperm whale-specific features, such as an asymmetric rostrum ("beak" or "snout"). Most sperm whale fossils date from the Miocene period, 23 to 5 million years ago. Diaphorocetus, from Argentina, has been dated to the early Miocene. Fossil sperm whales from the Middle Miocene include Aulophyseter, Idiorophus and Orycterocetus, all of which were found on the West Coast of the United States, and Scaldicetus, found in Europe and Japan. Orycterocetus fossils have also been found in the North Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea, in addition to the west coast of the United States. Placoziphius, found in Europe, and Acrophyseter, from Peru, are dated to the late Miocene.
Fossil sperm whales differ from modern sperm whales in tooth count and the shape of the face and jaws. For example, Scaldicetus had a tapered rostrum. Genera from the Oligocene and early and middle Miocene, with the possible exception of Aulophyseter, had teeth in their upper jaws. Acrophyseter, from the late Miocene, also had teeth in both the upper and lower jaws as well as a short rostrum and an upward curving mandible (lower jaw). These anatomical differences suggest that fossil species may not have necessarily been deep-sea squid eaters such as the modern sperm whale, but that some genera mainly ate fish. Zygophyseter, dated from the middle to late Miocene and found in southern Italy, had teeth in both jaws and appears to have been adapted to feed on large prey, rather like the modern killer whale (orca). Other fossil sperm whales with adaptations similar to this are collectively known as killer sperm whales.
Two poorly known fossil species belonging to the modern genus Physeter have been recognized so far: P. antiquus (Neogene of France) and P. vetus (Neogene of eastern North America). Physeter vetus is very likely an invalid species, as the few teeth that were used to identify this species appear to be identical to those of another toothed whale, Orycterocetus quadratidens.
Phylogeny
The traditional view has been that Mysticeti (baleen whales) and Odontoceti (toothed whales) arose from more primitive whales early in the Oligocene period, and that the super-family Physeteroidea, which contains the sperm whale, dwarf sperm whale, and pygmy sperm whale, diverged from other toothed whales soon after that, over 23 million years ago. From 1993 to 1996, molecular phylogenetics analyses by Milinkovitch and colleagues, based on comparing the genes of various modern whales, suggested that the sperm whales are more closely related to the baleen whales than they are to other toothed whales, which would have meant that Odontoceti were not monophyletic; in other words, it did not consist of a single ancestral toothed whale species and all its descendants. However, more recent studies, based on various combinations of comparative anatomy and molecular phylogenetics, criticised Milinkovitch's analysis on technical grounds and reaffirmed that the Odontoceti are monophyletic.
These analyses also confirm that there was a rapid evolutionary radiation (diversification) of the Physeteroidea in the Miocene period. The Kogiidae (dwarf and pygmy sperm whales) diverged from the Physeteridae (true sperm whales) at least 8 million years ago.
Usage by humansSperm whaling
Spermaceti, obtained primarily from the spermaceti organ, and sperm oil, obtained primarily from the blubber in the body, were much sought after by 18th, 19th, and 20th century whalers. These substances found a variety of commercial applications, such as candles, soap, cosmetics, machine oil, other specialised lubricants, lamp oil, pencils, crayons, leather waterproofing, rust-proofing materials and many pharmaceutical compounds. Ambergris, a highly expensive, solid, waxy, flammable substance produced in the digestive system of sperm whales, was also sought as a fixative in perfumery.
Prior to the early eighteenth century, hunting was mostly by indigenous Indonesians. Legend has it that sometime in the early 18th century, around 1712, Captain Christopher Hussey, while cruising for right whales near shore, was blown offshore by a northerly wind, where he encountered a sperm whale pod and killed one. Although the story may not be true, sperm whales were indeed soon exploited by American whalers. Judge Paul Dudley, in his Essay upon the Natural History of Whales (1725), states that a certain Atkins, 10 or 12 years in the trade, was among the first to catch sperm whales sometime around 1720 off the New England coast.
There were only a few recorded instances during the first few decades (1709–1730s) of offshore sperm whaling. Instead, sloops concentrated on the Nantucket Shoals, where they would have taken right whales or went to the Davis Strait region to catch bowhead whales. By the early 1740s, with the advent of spermaceti candles (before 1743), American vessels began to focus on sperm whales. The diary of Benjamin Bangs (1721–1769) shows that, along with the bumpkin sloop he sailed, he found three other sloops flensing sperm whales off the coast of North Carolina in late May 1743. On returning to Nantucket in the summer 1744 on a subsequent voyage, he noted that "45 spermacetes are brought in here this day," another indication that American sperm whaling was in full swing.
American sperm whaling soon spread from the east coast of the American colonies to the Gulf Stream, the Grand Banks, West Africa (1763), the Azores (1765), and the South Atlantic (1770s). From 1770 to 1775 Massachusetts, New York, Connecticut, and Rhode Island ports produced 45,000 barrels of sperm oil annually, compared to 8,500 of whale oil. In the same decade, the British began sperm whaling, employing American ships and personnel. By the following decade, the French had entered the trade, also employing American expertise. Sperm whaling increased until the mid-nineteenth century. Spermaceti oil was important in public lighting (for example, in lighthouses, where it was used in the United States until 1862, when it was replaced by lard oil, in turn replaced by petroleum) and for lubricating the machines (such as those used in cotton mills) of the Industrial Revolution. Sperm whaling declined in the second half of the nineteenth century, as petroleum came into broader use. In that sense, petroleum use may be said to have protected whale populations from even greater exploitation. Sperm whaling in the 18th century began with small sloops carrying only one or two whaleboats. The fleet's scope and size increased over time, and larger ships entered the fishery. In the late 18th century and early 19th century, sperm whaling ships sailed to the equatorial Pacific, the Indian Ocean, Japan, the coast of Arabia, Australia and New Zealand. Hunting could be dangerous to the crew, since sperm whales (especially bulls) will readily fight to defend themselves against attack, unlike most baleen whales. When dealing with a threat, sperm whales will use their huge head effectively as a battering ram. Arguably the most famous sperm whale counter-attack occurred on 20 November 1820, when a whale claimed to be about 25.9 metres (85 ft) long rammed and sank the Nantucket whaleship Essex. Only 8 out of 20 remaining sailors survived to be rescued by other ships. This instance is popularly believed to have inspired Herman Melville's famous book Moby-Dick.

The sperm whale's ivory-like teeth were often sought by 18th- and 19th-century whalers, who used them to produce inked carvings known as scrimshaw. 30 teeth of the sperm whale can be used for ivory. Each of these teeth, up to 20 cm (8 in) and 8 cm (3 in) across, are hollow for the first half of their length. Like walrus ivory, sperm whale ivory has two distinct layers. However, sperm whale ivory contains a much thicker inner layer. Though a widely practised art in the 19th century, scrimshaw using genuine sperm whale ivory declined substantially after the retirement of the whaling fleets in the 1880s.
Modern whaling was more efficient than open-boat whaling, employing steam-powered ships and exploding harpoons. Initially, modern whaling activity focused on large baleen whales, but as these populations were taken, sperm whaling increased. Spermaceti, the fine waxy oil produced by sperm whales, was in high demand. In both the 1941–1942 and 1942–1943 seasons, Norwegian expeditions took over 3,000 sperm whales off the coast of Peru alone. After World War II, whaling continued unabated to obtain oil for cosmetics and high-performance machinery, such as automobile transmissions.
The hunting led to the near-extinction of large whales, including sperm whales, until bans on whale oil use were instituted in 1972. The International Whaling Commission gave the species full protection in 1985, but hunting by Japan in the northern Pacific Ocean continued until 1988.
It is estimated that the historic worldwide population numbered 1,100,000 before commercial sperm whaling began in the early 18th century. By 1880, it had declined by an estimated 29 percent. From that date until 1946, the population appears to have partially recovered as whaling activity decreased, but after the Second World War, the population declined even further, to 33 per cent of the pre-whaling population. Between 184,000 and 236,000 sperm whales were killed by the various whaling nations in the 19th century, while in the 20th century, at least 770,000 were taken, the majority between 1946 and 1980.

Sperm whales increase levels of primary production and carbon export by depositing iron-rich faeces into surface waters of the Southern Ocean The iron-rich faeces cause phytoplankton to grow and take up more carbon from the atmosphere. When the phytoplankton dies, it sinks to the deep ocean and takes the atmospheric carbon with it. By reducing the abundance of sperm whales in the Southern Ocean, whaling has resulted in an extra 2 million tonnes of carbon remaining in the atmosphere each year.
Remaining sperm whale populations are large enough that the species' conservation status is rated as vulnerable rather than endangered. The current global sperm whale population is estimated at 360,000. However, the recovery from centuries of commercial whaling is a slow process, particularly in the South Pacific, where the toll on breeding-age males was severe.
Conservation status
The total number of sperm whales worldwide is unknown, but it is estimated to be as many as 360,000. The conservation outlook is brighter than for many other whales. Commercial whaling has ceased, and the species is protected almost worldwide, though records indicate that in the 11-year period starting from 2000, Japanese vessels have caught 51 sperm whales. Fishermen do not target sperm whales to eat, but long-line fishing operations in the Gulf of Alaska have complained about sperm whales "stealing" fish from their lines.
Since the 2000s, entanglement in fishing nets and collisions with ships represent the greatest threats to the sperm whale population. Other threats include ingestion of marine debris, ocean noise, and chemical pollution. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) regards the sperm whale as being "vulnerable". The species is listed as endangered on the United States Endangered Species Act.
Sperm whales are listed on Appendix I and Appendix II of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS). It is listed on Appendix I as this species has been categorized as being in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant proportion of their range and CMS Parties strive towards strictly protecting these animals, conserving or restoring the places where they live, mitigating obstacles to migration and controlling other factors that might endanger them. It is listed on Appendix II as it has an unfavourable conservation status or would benefit significantly from international co-operation organised by tailored agreements. It is also covered by the Agreement on the Conservation of Cetaceans in the Black Sea, Mediterranean Sea and Contiguous Atlantic Area (ACCOBAMS) and the Memorandum of Understanding for the Conservation of Cetaceans and Their Habitats in the Pacific Islands Region (Pacific Cetaceans MOU).
The species is protected under Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES). This makes commercial international trade (including in parts and derivatives) prohibited, with all other international trade strictly regulated through a system of permits and certificates.
Cultural importance
Rope-mounted teeth are important cultural objects throughout the Pacific. In New Zealand, the Māori know them as "rei puta"; such whale tooth pendants were rare objects because sperm whales were not actively hunted in traditional Māori society. Whale ivory and bone were taken from beached whales. In Fiji the teeth are known as tabua, traditionally given as gifts for atonement or esteem (called sevusevu), and were important in negotiations between rival chiefs. Friedrich Ratzel in The History of Mankind reported in 1896 that, in Fiji, whales' or cachalots' teeth were the most-demanded article of ornament or value. They occurred often in necklaces. Today the tabua remains an important item in Fijian life. The teeth were originally rare in Fiji and Tonga, which exported teeth, but with the Europeans' arrival, teeth flooded the market and this "currency" collapsed. The oversupply led in turn to the development of the European art of scrimshaw.
Herman Melville's novel Moby-Dick is based on a true story about a sperm whale that attacked and sank the whaleship Essex. Melville associated the sperm whale with the Bible's Leviathan. The fearsome reputation perpetuated by Melville was based on bull whales' ability to fiercely defend themselves from attacks by early whalers, smashing whaling boats and, occasionally, attacking and destroying whaling ships.
In Jules Verne's 1870 novel Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas, the Nautilus fights a group of "cachalots" (sperm whales) to protect a pod of southern right whales from their attacks. Verne portrays them as being savage hunters ("nothing but mouth and teeth").
The sperm whale was designated as the Connecticut state animal by the General Assembly in 1975. It was selected because of its specific contribution to the state's history and because of its present-day plight as an endangered species.
Harpooned and entangled sperm whales may have been responsible for well-known sea serpent sightings.
Watching sperm whales
Sperm whales are not the easiest of whales to watch, due to their long dive times and ability to travel long distances underwater. However, due to the distinctive look and large size of the whale, watching is increasingly popular. Sperm whale watchers often use hydrophones to listen to the clicks of the whales and locate them before they surface. Popular locations for sperm whale watching include the town of Kaikōura on New Zealand's South Island, Andenes and Tromsø in Arctic Norway; as well as the Azores, where the continental shelf is so narrow that whales can be observed from the shore, and Dominica where a long-term scientific research program, The Dominica Sperm Whale Project, has been in operation since 2005.
Plastic waste
The introduction of plastic waste to the ocean environment by humans is relatively new. From the 1970s, sperm whales have occasionally been found with pieces of plastic in their stomachs.


The list of mammals of Washington lists mammalian species that live in the U.S. state of Washington, including 9 introduced mammal species. The list does not include species found exclusively in captivity.
Opossums
Family: Didelphidae

Virginia opossum, Didelphis virginiana introduced
Shrews and moles
Family: Soricidae

Marsh shrew, Sorex bendirii
Cinereus shrew, Sorex cinereus
American pygmy shrew, Sorex hoyi
Merriam's shrew, Sorex merriami
Montane shrew, Sorex monticolus
Preble's shrew, Sorex preblei
Olympic shrew, Sorex rohweri
Trowbridge's shrew, Sorex trowbridgii
Vagrant shrew, Sorex vagrans
Family: Talpidae

American shrew mole, Neurotrichus gibbsii
Coast mole, Scapanus orarius
Townsend's mole, Scapanus townsendii
Bats
Family: Vespertilionidae

Pallid bat, Antrozous pallidus
Townsend's big-eared bat, Corynorhinus townsendii
Big brown bat, Eptesicus fuscus
Spotted bat, Euderma maculatum
Silver-haired bat, Lasionycteris noctivagans
Hoary bat, Lasiurus cinereus
California myotis, Myotis californicus
Western small-footed myotis, Myotis ciliolabrum
Long-eared myotis, Myotis evotis
Keen's myotis, Myotis keenii
Little brown myotis, Myotis lucifugus
Fringed myotis, Myotis thysanodes
Long-legged myotis, Myotis volans
Yuma myotis, Myotis yumanensis
Canyon bat, Parastrellus hesperus
Lagomorphs
Family: Ochotonidae

American pika, Ochotona princeps
Family: Leporidae

Pygmy rabbit, Brachylagus idahoensis
Snowshoe hare, Lepus americanus
Black-tailed jackrabbit, Lepus californicus
White-tailed jackrabbit, Lepus townsendii
European rabbit, Oryctolagus cuniculus introduced
Eastern cottontail, Sylvilagus floridanus
Mountain cottontail, Sylvilagus nuttallii
Rodents
Family: Aplodontiidae

Mountain beaver, Aplodontia rufa
Family: Sciuridae

Eastern gray squirrel, Sciurus carolinensis introduced
Western gray squirrel, Sciurus griseus
Fox squirrel, Sciurus niger
Douglas squirrel, Tamiasciurus douglasii
American red squirrel, Tamiasciurus hudsonicus
Hoary marmot, Marmota caligata
Yellow-bellied marmot, Marmota flaviventris
Olympic marmot, Marmota olympus
California ground squirrel, Otospermophilus beecheyi
Golden-mantled ground squirrel, Callospermophilus lateralis
Cascade golden-mantled ground squirrel, Callospermophilus saturatus
Columbian ground squirrel, Urocitellus columbianus
Piute ground squirrel, Urocitellus mollis
Townsend's ground squirrel, Urocitellus townsendii
Washington ground squirrel, Urocitellus washingtoni
Yellow-pine chipmunk, Tamias amoenus
Coulee chipmunk, Tamias grisescens
Least chipmunk, Tamias minimus
Red-tailed chipmunk, Tamias ruficaudus
Townsend's chipmunk, Tamias townsendii
Northern flying squirrel, Glaucomys sabrinus
Family: Castoridae

American beaver, Castor canadensis
Family: Heteromyidae

Ord's kangaroo rat, Dipodomys ordii
Great Basin pocket mouse, Perognathus parvus
Family: Geomyidae

Mazama pocket gopher, Thomomys mazama
Northern pocket gopher, Thomomys talpoides
Family: Zapodidae

Western jumping mouse, Zapus princeps
Pacific jumping mouse, Zapus trinotatus
Family: Cricetidae

Sagebrush vole, Lemmiscus curtatus
Gray-tailed vole, Microtus canicaudus
Long-tailed vole, Microtus longicaudus
Montane vole, Microtus montanus
Creeping vole, Microtus oregoni
Western meadow vole, Microtus drummondii
Water vole, Microtus richardsoni
Townsend's vole, Microtus townsendii
Southern red-backed vole, Clethrionomys gapperi
Muskrat, Ondatra zibethicus
Western heather vole, Phenacomys intermedius
Northern bog lemming, Synaptomys borealis
Bushy-tailed woodrat, Neotoma cinerea
Northern grasshopper mouse, Onychomys leucogaster
Western deer mouse, Peromyscus sonoriensis
Northwestern deer mouse, Peromyscus keeni
Western harvest mouse, Reithrodontomys megalotis
Family: Muridae

House mouse, Mus musculus introduced
Norway rat, Rattus norvegicus introduced
Black rat, Rattus rattus introduced
Family: Erethizontidae

North American porcupine, Erethizon dorsatum
Family: Myocastoridae

Nutria, Myocastor coypus introduced
Carnivorans
Family: Canidae

Coyote, Canis latrans
Gray wolf, Canis lupus
Gray fox, Urocyon cinereoargenteus
Red fox, Vulpes vulpes
Family: Ursidae

American black bear, Ursus americanus
Brown bear, Ursus arctos
Grizzly bear, U. a. horribilis
Family: Otariidae

Northern fur seal, Callorhinus ursinus
Steller sea lion, Eumetopias jubatus
California sea lion, Zalophus californianus
Family: Phocidae

Northern elephant seal, Mirounga angustirostris
Harbor seal, Phoca vitulina
Family: Procyonidae

Raccoon, Procyon lotor
Family: Mephitidae

Striped skunk, Mephitis mephitis
Western spotted skunk, Spilogale gracilis
Family: Felidae

Canada lynx, Lynx canadensis
Bobcat, Lynx rufus
Cougar, Puma concolor
Family: Mustelidae

Sea otter, Enhydra lutris
North American river otter, Lontra canadensis
Long-tailed weasel, Neogale frenata
American mink, Neogale vison
Fisher, Pekania pennanti
American ermine, Mustela richardsonii
Wolverine, Gulo gulo
Pacific marten, Martes caurina
American badger, Taxidea taxus
Whales, dolphins and porpoises
Family: Balaenidae

North Pacific right whale, Eubalaena japonica
Family: Balaenopteridae

Minke whale, Balaenoptera acutorostrata
Sei whale, Balaenoptera borealis
Blue whale, Balaenoptera musculus
Fin whale, Balaenoptera physalus
Humpback whale, Megaptera novaengliae
Gray whale, Eschrictius robustus
Family: Delphinidae

Common dolphin, Delphinus delphis
Risso's dolphin, Grampus griseus
Pacific white-sided dolphin, Lagenorynchus obliquidens
Northern right whale dolphin, Lissodelphis borealis
Orca, Orcinus orca
Family: Monodontidae

Beluga whale, Delphinapterus leucas vagrant
Family: Phocoenidae

Harbor porpoise, Phocoena phocoena
Dall's porpoise, Phocoenoides dalli
Family: Physeteridae

Pygmy sperm whale, Kogia breviceps
Dwarf sperm whale, Kogia sima
Sperm whale, Physeter macrocephalus
Family: Ziphiidae

Baird's beaked whale, Berardius bairdii
Hubbs' beaked whale, Mesoplodon carlhubbsi
Stejneger's beaked whale, Mesoplodon stejnegeri
Cuvier's beaked whale, Ziphius cavirostris
Even-toed ungulates
Family: Antilocapridae

Pronghorn, Antilocapra americana reintroduced
Family: Bovidae

American bison, Bison bison reintroduced
Mountain goat, Oreamnos americanus
Bighorn sheep, Ovis canadensis
Family: Cervidae

Moose, Alces alces
Elk, Cervus canadensis
Mule deer, Odocoileus hemionus
White-tailed deer, Odocoileus virginianius
Caribou, Rangifer tarandus extirpated
Boreal woodland caribou, R. t. caribou extirpated


The American bison (Bison bison; pl.: bison), commonly known as the American buffalo, or simply buffalo (not to be confused with true buffalo), is a species of bison that is endemic to North America. It is one of two extant species of bison, along with the European bison. Its historical range circa 9000 BC is referred to as the great bison belt, a tract of rich grassland spanning from Alaska south to the Gulf of Mexico, and east to the Atlantic Seaboard (nearly to the Atlantic tidewater in some areas), as far north as New York, south to Georgia, and according to some sources, further south to northern Florida, with sightings in North Carolina near Buffalo Ford on the Catawba River as late as 1750.
Two subspecies or ecotypes have been described: the plains bison (B. b. bison), smaller and with a more rounded hump; and the wood bison (B. b. athabascae), the larger of the two and having a taller, square hump. There has been a proposal to divide the plains bison into subspecies of northern (B. b. montanae) and southern (B. b. bison), but this proposal has limited scientific support. The wood bison is one of the largest wild species of extant bovid in the world, surpassed only by the Asian gaur. With wild animals weighing up to 1,270 kg (2,800 lb), the bison is among the heaviest extant land animals in North America and the heaviest herbivore.
Once roaming in vast herds, the species nearly became extinct by a combination of commercial hunting and slaughter in the 19th century and introduction of bovine diseases from domestic cattle. With an estimated population of 60 million in the late 18th century, the species was reduced to 541 animals by 1889 as part of the genocide of the Native Americans, because the American bison was a major resource for their traditional way of life (food source, hides for clothing and shelter, and horns and bones for tools). Recovery efforts expanded in the mid-20th century, with a resurgence to roughly 31,000 wild bison as of March 2019. For many years, the population was primarily found in a few national parks and reserves. As a result of multiple reintroductions, the species freely roams wild in several regions in the United States, Canada and Mexico. Others are kept in smaller natural areas as conservation herds, while some are also kept in private commercial herds. The American bison has also been introduced in Russia, with a population established in Ingilor Nature Park in Yakutia.
Spanning back millennia, Indigenous peoples of the Great Plains have had cultural and spiritual connections to the American bison. It is the national mammal of the United States.
Etymology
In American English, both buffalo and bison are considered correct terms for the American bison. However, in British English, the word buffalo is reserved for the African buffalo and water buffalo and not used for the bison.
In English usage, the term buffalo was used to refer to the American mammal as early as 1625. The word bison was applied in the 1690s.
Buffalo was applied to the American bison by Samuel de Champlain as the French word buffles in 1616 (published 1619), after seeing skins and a drawing. These were shown to him by members of the Nipissing First Nation, who said they traveled forty days (from east of Lake Huron) to trade with another nation who hunted the animals. Buffel in turn comes from Portuguese bufalo (water buffalo), which comes from Latin bufalus (an antelope, gazelle, or wild ox), from Greek boubalos. The same Greek word boubalos is also the origin for the Bubal hartebeest.
Bison was borrowed from French bison in the early 17th century, from Latin bison (aurochs), from a Proto-Germanic word similar to wisent and, per Etymonline, first applied to American buffalo in the 1690s.
In Plains Indian languages in general, male and female bison are distinguished, with each having a different designation rather than there being a single generic word covering both sexes. Thus:

in Arapaho: bii (bison cow), henéécee (bison bull)
in Lakota: pté (bison cow), tȟatȟáŋka (bison bull)
Such a distinction is not a general feature of the language (for example, Arapaho possesses gender-neutral terms for other large mammals such as elk, mule deer, etc.), and so presumably is due to the special significance of the bison in Plains Indian life and culture.
Description
A bison has a shaggy, long, dark-brown winter coat, and a lighter-weight, lighter-brown summer coat. Male bison are significantly larger and heavier than females. Plains bison are often in the smaller range of sizes, and wood bison in the larger range. Head-rump lengths at maximum up to 3.5 m (11 ft 6 in) for males and 2.85 m (9 ft 4 in) for females long and the tail adding 30 to 95 cm (1 ft 0 in to 3 ft 1 in). Heights at withers in the species can reach up to 186 to 201 cm (6 ft 1 in to 6 ft 7 in) for B. b. bison and B. b. athabascae respectively. Typically weights can range from 318 to 1,179 kg (701 to 2,599 lb), 460 to 988 kg (1,014 to 2,178 lb) with medians of 730 to 792.5 kg (1,609 to 1,747 lb) (B.b. bison) and 943.6 kg (2,080 lb) (B.b.athabascae) in males, and 360 to 640 kg (790 to 1,410 lb) with medians of 450 to 497.6 kg (992 to 1,097 lb) in females, although the lowest weights probably representing typical weight around the age of sexual maturity at 2 to 3 years of age.
The heaviest wild bull for B.b.bison ever recorded weighed 1,270 kg (2,800 lb) while there had been bulls estimated to be 1,400 kg (3,000 lb). B.b.athabascae is significantly larger and heavier on average than B.b.bison while the number of recorded samples for the former was limited after the rediscovery of a relatively pure herd. Elk Island National Park, which has wild populations of both wood and plains bison, has recorded maximum weights for bull bison of 1,186 kg (2,615 lb) (plains) and 1,099 kg (2,423 lb) (wood), but noted that three-quarters of all bison over 1,000 kg (2,200 lb) were wood bison. When raised in captivity and farmed for meat, the bison can grow unnaturally heavy and the largest semidomestic bison weighed 1,724 kg (3,801 lb). The heads and forequarters are massive, and both sexes have short, curved horns that can grow up to 60 cm (2 ft) long with 90 cm (3 ft) to 124 cm (4 ft) width, which they use in fighting for status within the herd and for defense.
Bison are herbivores, grazing on the grasses and sedges of the North American prairies. Their daily schedule involves two-hour periods of grazing, resting, and cud chewing, then moving to a new location to graze again. Sexually mature young bulls may try to start mating with cows by the age of two or three years, but if more mature bulls are present, they may not be able to compete until they reach five years of age.
For the first two months of life, calves are lighter in color than mature bison. Though extremely rare, white buffalos exist.
Evolution
Bison are members of the tribe Bovini. Genetic evidence from nuclear DNA indicates that the closest living relatives of bison are yaks, with bison being nested within the genus Bos, rendering Bos without including bison paraphyletic. While nuclear DNA indicates that the two living bison species are each other's closest living relatives, the mitochondrial DNA of European bison is more closely related to that of domestic cattle and aurochs, which is suggested to be the result of either incomplete lineage sorting or ancient introgression.
Bison first appeared in Asia during the Early Pleistocene, around 2.6 million years ago. Bison only arrived in North America 195,000 to 135,000 years ago, during the late Middle Pleistocene, descending from the widespread Siberian steppe bison (Bison priscus), which had migrated through Beringia. Following their first appearance in North America, the bison rapidly differentiated into new species, such as the largest of all bison, the long-horned Bison latifrons, along with Bison antiquus. The first appearance of bison in North America is considered to define the regional Rancholabrean faunal stage, due to its major impact on the ecology of the continent. Modern American bison are thought to have evolved from B. antiquus at the end of the Late Pleistocene - beginning of the Holocene, with likely intermediates between the species referred to as Bison "occidentalis". The North American bison population experienced demographic stability during the Middle Holocene but began a slow decline in the Late Holocene beginning about 2,700 BP.
Differences from European bison
Although they are superficially similar, the American and European bison exhibit a number of physical and behavioral differences. Adult American bison are slightly heavier on average because of their less rangy build and have shorter legs, which render them slightly shorter at the shoulder. American bison tend to graze more and browse less than their European relatives because their necks are set differently. Compared to the nose of the American bison, that of the European species is set farther forward than the forehead when the neck is in a neutral position. The body of the American bison is hairier, though its tail has less hair than that of the European bison. The horns of the European bison point forward through the plane of its face, making it more adept at fighting through the interlocking of horns in the same manner as domestic cattle, unlike the American bison, which favors charging. American bison are more easily tamed than the European and breed more readily with domestic cattle.
Crossbreeding with cattle
During the population bottleneck, after the great slaughter of American bison during the 19th century, the number of bison remaining alive in North America declined to as low as 541. During that period, a handful of ranchers gathered remnants of the existing herds to save the species from extinction. These ranchers bred some of the bison with cattle in an effort to produce "cattalo" or "beefalo". Accidental crossing was also known to occur. Generally, male domestic bulls were crossed with bison cows, producing offspring of which only the females were fertile. The crossbred animals did not demonstrate any form of hybrid vigor, so the practice was abandoned. The proportion of cattle DNA that has been measured in introgressed individuals and bison herds is typically quite low, ranging from 0.56 to 1.8%. Many claimed "beefalo", even those regarded as pedigree, have no detectable bison ancestry. In the United States, many ranchers use DNA testing to cull the residual cattle genetics from their bison herds. The U.S. National Bison Association has adopted a code of ethics which prohibits its members from deliberately crossbreeding bison with any other species.
Range and population
Population estimates in 2010 ranged from 400,000 to 500,000, with approximately 20,500 animals in 62 conservation herds and the remainder in approximately 6,400 commercial herds. According to the IUCN, roughly 15,000 bison are considered wild, free-range bison not primarily confined by fencing.
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) has reintroduced bison to over a dozen nature preserves around the United States. In October 2016, TNC established its easternmost bison herd in the country, at Kankakee Sands nature preserve in Morocco, Newton County, Indiana. In 2014, U.S. Tribes and Canadian First Nations signed a treaty to help with the restoration of bison, the first to be signed in nearly 150 years.
Habitat and trails
American bison live in river valleys, and on prairies and plains. Typical habitat is open or semiopen grasslands, as well as sagebrush, semiarid lands, and scrublands. Some lightly wooded areas are also known historically to have supported bison. Bison also graze in hilly or mountainous areas where the slopes are not steep. Though not particularly known as high-altitude animals, bison in the Yellowstone Park bison herd are frequently found at elevations above 2,400 m (8,000 ft), and the Henry Mountains bison herd is found on the plains around the Henry Mountains, Utah, as well as in mountain valleys of the Henry Mountains to an altitude of 3,000 m (10,000 ft). Reintroduced plains bison in Banff National Park have been observed to roam mountainous areas, including high ridges and steep drainages. Archaeological finds indicate some bison spent their lives within mountain ranges while others may have migrated in and out.
Those in Yukon, Canada, typically summer in alpine plateaus above treeline. The first thoroughfares of North America, except for the time-obliterated paths of mastodon or muskox and the routes of the mound builders, were the traces made by bison and deer in seasonal migration and between feeding grounds and salt licks. Many of these routes, hammered by countless hoofs instinctively following watersheds and the crests of ridges in avoidance of lower places' summer muck and winter snowdrifts, and often following the routes of least resistance across rolling terrain, were followed by the aboriginal North Americans as routes to hunting grounds and as warriors' paths. They were invaluable to explorers and were adopted by pioneers.
Bison traces were characteristically north and south along seasonal migration routes, but several key east–west buffalo trails were used later as routes for railways. Some of these include the Cumberland Gap through the Blue Ridge Mountains to upper Kentucky. A heavily used trace crossed the Ohio River at the Falls of the Ohio and ran west, crossing the Wabash River near Vincennes, Indiana. In Senator Thomas Hart Benton's phrase saluting these sagacious path-makers, the bison paved the way for the railroads to the Pacific.
Mexico
The southern extent of the historic range of the American bison includes northern Mexico and adjoining areas in the United States as documented by archeological records and historical accounts from Mexican archives from 700 CE to the 19th century. The Janos-Hidalgo bison herd has ranged between Chihuahua, Mexico, and New Mexico, United States, since at least the 1920s. The persistence of this herd suggests that habitat for bison is suitable in northern Mexico. In 2009, genetically pure bison were reintroduced to the Janos Biosphere Reserve in northern Chihuahua adding to the Mexican bison population. In 2020, the second herd was formed in Maderas del Carmen. A private reserve named Jagüey de Ferniza has kept bison since before the above-mentioned reintroductions in Coahuila.
Introductions to Siberia
Since 2006, an outherd of wood bison sent from Alberta's Elk Island National Park was established in Yakutia, Russia as a practice of pleistocene rewilding; wood bison are the most similar to the extinct steppe bison species (Bison priscus sp.). The bison are adapting well to the cold climate, and Yakutia's Red List officially registered the species in 2019; a second herd was formed in 2020.
Plains bison were also translocated into the Pleistocene Park, as more-favored wood bison could not be acquired.
Behavior and ecology
Bison are migratory and herd migrations can be directional as well as altitudinal in some areas. Bison have usual daily movements between foraging sites during the summer. In the Hayden Valley, Wyoming, bison have been recorded traveling, on average, 3 km (2 mi) per day. The summer ranges of bison appear to be influenced by seasonal vegetation changes, interspersion and size of foraging sites, the rut, and the number of biting insects. The size of preserve and availability of water may also be a factor. Bison are largely grazers, eating primarily grasses and sedges, turning to sagebrush and other non-graminoids in times of hardship. On shortgrass pasture, bison predominately consume warm-season grasses. On mixed prairie, cool-season grasses, including some sedges, apparently compose 79–96% of their diet. In montane and northern areas, sedges are selected throughout the year. Bison also drink water or consume snow on a daily basis.
Social behavior and reproduction
Female bison live in maternal herds which include other females and their offspring. Male offspring leave their maternal herd when around three years old and either live alone or join other males in bachelor herds. Male and female herds usually do not mingle until the breeding season, which can occur from July through September. However, female herds may also contain a few older males. During the breeding season, dominant bulls maintain a small harem of females for mating. Individual bulls "tend" cows until allowed to mate, by following them around and chasing away rival males. The tending bull shields the female's vision with his body so she will not see any other challenging males. A challenging bull may bellow or roar to get a female's attention, and the tending bull has to bellow or roar back. The most dominant bulls mate in the first 2–3 weeks of the season. More subordinate bulls mate with any remaining estrous cow that has not mated yet. Male bison play no part in raising the young.

Bison herds have dominance hierarchies that exist for both males and females. A bison's dominance is related to its birth date. Bison born earlier in the breeding season are more likely to be larger and more dominant as adults. Thus, bison are able to pass on their dominance to their offspring as dominant bison breed earlier in the season. In addition to dominance, the older bison of a generation also have a higher fertility rate than the younger ones.
Bison mate in August and September; gestation is 285 days. A single reddish-brown calf nurses until the next calf is born. If the cow is not pregnant, a calf will nurse for 18 months. Cows nurse their calves for at least 7 or 8 months, but most calves seem to be weaned before the end of their first year. At three years of age, bison cows are mature enough to produce a calf. The birthing period for bison in boreal biomes is protracted compared to that of other northern ungulates, such as moose and caribou.
Bison have a life expectancy around 15 years in the wild and up to 25 years in captivity. However, males and females from a hunted population also subject to wolf predation in northern Canada have been reported to live to 22 and 25 years of age, respectively.
Bison have been observed to display homosexual behaviors, males much more so than females. In the case of males, it is unlikely to be related to dominance, but rather to social bonding or gaining sexual experience.
Horning
Bison mate in late spring and summer in more open plain areas. During fall and winter, bison tend to gather in more wooded areas. During this time, bison partake in horning behaviors. They rub their horns against trees, young saplings, and even utility poles. Aromatic trees like cedars and pine seem to be preferred. Horning appears to be associated with insect defense, as it occurs most often in the fall when the insect population is at its highest. Cedar and pines emit an aroma after bison horn them and this seems to be used as a deterrent for insects.
Wallowing behavior
A bison wallow is a shallow depression in the soil, which bison use either wet or dry. Bison roll in these depressions, covering themselves with dust or mud. Past and current hypotheses to explain the purpose of wallowing include grooming associated with shedding, male-male interaction (typically rutting), social behavior for group cohesion, play, relief from skin irritation due to biting insects, reduction of ectoparasite (tick and lice) load, and thermoregulation. Bison wallowing has important ecosystem engineering effects and enhances plant and animal diversity on prairies.
Predation
While often secure from predation because of their size and strength, in some areas, vulnerable individuals are regularly preyed upon by wolves. Wolf predation typically peaks in late winter, when elk migrates south and bison are distressed with heavy snows and shortages of food sources, with attacks usually being concentrated on weakened and injured cows and calves. Wolves more actively target herds with calves than those without. The length of a predation episode varies, ranging from a few minutes to over nine hours. Bison calves use five apparent defense strategies in protecting themselves from wolves: running to a cow, running to a herd, running to the nearest bull, running in the front or center of a stampeding herd, and entering a lake or river or other body of water. When fleeing wolves in open areas, cows with young calves take the lead, while bulls take to the rear of the herds to guard the cows' escape. Bison typically ignore wolves not displaying hunting behavior. Wolf packs specializing in bison tend to have more males because their larger size than females allows them to wrestle prey to the ground more effectively. Healthy, mature bulls in herds rarely fall prey.
Grizzly bears are known to feed on carcass and may steal wolves' kills. Grizzlies can sometimes kill calves as well as old, injured, or sick adult bison, but direct killing of adult bison is rare even when grizzlies target lone and injured young individuals. Attacking a healthy bison is risky for a bear, who itself may be killed instead.
Dangers to humans
Bison are among the most dangerous animals encountered by visitors to the various North American national parks and will attack humans if provoked. They appear slow because of their lethargic movements but can easily outrun humans; bison have been observed running as fast as 65 to 70 km/h (40 to 45 mph).  Bison may approach people for curiosity. Close encounters, including to touch the animals, can be dangerous, and gunshots do not startle them.

Between 1980 and 1999, more than three times as many people in Yellowstone National Park were injured by bison than by bears. During this period, bison charged and injured 79 people, with injuries ranging from goring puncture wounds and broken bones to bruises and abrasions. Bears injured 24 people during the same time. Three people died from the injuries inflicted—one person by bison in 1983, and two people by bears in 1984 and 1986.
Genetics
A major problem faced by bison is a lack of genetic diversity due to the population bottleneck the species experienced during its near-extinction in the late 1800s. Another genetic issue is the entry of genes from domestic cattle into the bison population, through hybridization.
Officially, the "American buffalo" is classified by the United States government as a type of cattle, and the government allows private herds to be managed as such. This is a reflection of the characteristics that bison share with cattle. Though the American bison is a separate species and usually regarded as being in a separate genus from domestic cattle (Bos taurus), they have a lot of genetic compatibility with cattle. American bison can interbreed with cattle, although only the female offspring are fertile in the first generation. These female hybrids can be bred back to either bison or domestic bulls, resulting in either 1/4 or 3/4 bison young. Female offspring from this cross are also fertile, but males are not reliably fertile unless they are either 7⁄8 bison or 7⁄8 domestic. Moreover, when they do interbreed, crossbreed animals in the first generation tend to look very much like purebred bison, so appearance is completely unreliable as a means of determining which is a purebred bison, a crossbred cow and a crossbred bison. Many ranchers have deliberately crossbred their cattle with bison, and some natural hybridization could be expected in areas where cattle and bison occur in the same range. Since cattle and bison eat similar food and tolerate similar conditions, they have often been in the same range together in the past, and opportunity for crossbreeding may sometimes have been common.

In recent decades, tests were developed to determine the source of mitochondrial DNA in cattle and bison, and most private "buffalo" herds were actually crossbred with cattle, and even most state and federal buffalo herds had some cattle DNA. With the advent of nuclear microsatellite DNA testing, the number of herds known to contain cattle genes has increased. As of 2011, though about 500,000 bison existed on private ranches and in public herds, perhaps only 15,000 to 25,000 of these bison were pure and not actually bison–cattle hybrids. DNA from domestic cattle (Bos taurus) has been found in almost all examined bison herds.
Significant public bison herds that do not appear to have hybridized domestic cattle genes are the Yellowstone Park bison herd, the Henry Mountains bison herd, which was started with bison taken from Yellowstone Park, the Wind Cave bison herd, and the Wood Buffalo National Park bison herd and subsidiary herds started from it, in Canada.
A landmark study of bison genetics performed by James Derr of Texas A&M University corroborated this. The Derr study was undertaken in an attempt to determine what genetic problems bison might face as they repopulate former areas, and it noted that bison seem to be adapting successfully, despite their apparent genetic bottleneck. One possible explanation for this might be the small number of domestic cattle genes in most bison populations, though this is not the only possible explanation for bison success.

In the study, cattle genes were also found in small amounts throughout most national, state, and private herds. "The hybridization experiments conducted by some of the owners of the five foundation herds of the late 1800s, have left a legacy of a small amount of cattle genetics in many of our existing bison herds," said Derr. "All of the state owned bison herds tested (except for possibly one) contain animals with domestic cattle mtDNA."
It appears that the one state herd that had no cattle genes was the Henry Mountains bison herd; the Henry Mountain herd was started initially with transplanted animals from Yellowstone Park. However, the extension of this herd into the Book Cliffs of central Utah involved mixing the founders with additional bison from another source, so it is not known if the Book Cliffs extension of the herd is also free of cattle hybridization.
A separate study by Wilson and Strobeck, published in Genome, was done to define the relationships between different herds of bison in the United States and Canada, and to determine whether the bison at Wood Buffalo National Park in Canada and the Yellowstone Park bison herd were possibly separate subspecies. The Wood Buffalo Park bison were determined to actually be crossbreeds between plains and wood bison, but their predominant genetic makeup was that of the expected "wood buffalo". However, the Yellowstone Park bison herd was pure plains bison, and not any of the other previously suggested subspecies. Another finding was that the bison in the Antelope Island herd in Utah appeared to be more distantly related to other plains bison in general than any other plains bison group that was tested, though this might be due to genetic drift caused by the small size of only 12 individuals in the founder population. A side finding of this was that the Antelope Island bison herd appears to be most closely related to the Wood Buffalo National Park bison herd, though the Antelope Island bison are actually plains bison.

In order to bolster the genetic diversity of the American bison, the National Park Service alongside the Department of the Interior announced the 2020 Bison Conservation Initiative on May 7, 2020. This initiative focuses on maintaining the genetic diversity of the metapopulation rather than individual herds. Small populations of bison are at considerably larger risk due to their decreased gene pool and are susceptible to catastrophic events more so than larger herds. The 2020 Bison Conservation Initiative aims to translocate up to three bison every five to ten years between the Department of the Interior's herds. Specific smaller herds will require a more intense management plan. Translocated bison will also be screened for any health defects such as infection of brucellosis bacteria as to not put the larger herd at risk.
Population bottleneck and near extinction
Bison went from numbering an estimated 60 million individuals before the 1870s to becoming nearly extinct in the 1880s. This was due to the mass slaughtering of bison during the 1870s, which caused the plains bison population to undergo a population bottleneck. The bottleneck resulted in a founding population of plains bison around 100 individuals, split into six herds, five of which were managed by private ranchers and one managed by the New York Zoological Park (now the Bronx Zoo). Additionally, a wild herd consisting of 25 individuals in Yellowstone National Park survived the bottleneck.
Mass killings of bisons was described as "a form of biocide in service of genocide" and "part of the campaign to ethnically cleanse Native Americans from the land".
Each of the privately ranched herds had an initial effective population size (Ne) of an estimated 5 to 7 individuals, for a total combined effective population size of between 30 and 50 individuals, from which all of the modern plains bison descend. While these herds have remained mostly isolated, some more than others, there has been some interbreeding between the herds over the past 150 years.
The conservation efforts and copious amounts of data taken on American bison populations allow for American bison to serve as a useful study case of population bottlenecking and its effects. This is especially true of the Texas State Bison Herd, which underwent very extreme genetic bottlenecking, with a founding population of only 5 individuals.
Texas State Bison Herd
The Texas State Bison Herd (TSBH), also known as the Goodnight herd, was established by Charles Goodnight in the mid-1880s with five wild-caught calves. In 1887, the herd consisted of 13 individuals; in 1910, the population consisted of 125 individuals; and in the 1920s, the population ranged from 200 to 250 individuals. In 1929, Goodnight died and the herd switched hands multiple times, leaving the population of the herd unknown from 1930 until the herd was donated to the State of Texas in 1997, with a population of 36 individuals, solely descended from the original five calves. By 2002, the population of the TSBH consisted of 40 individuals and had concerningly low birth rates and high rates of calf mortality. This led to extra attention being given to this herd by conservationists who then performed significant amounts of genetic testing.
Goodnight was an advocate for the hybridization of bison with cattle, in the hopes of creating a stronger and healthier breed. When the herd was donated to the State of Texas, genetic testing revealed that 6 out of 36 individuals still carried cattle mitochondrial DNA.
Researchers found that the average number of alleles per locus and the heterozygosity levels (a measure of genetic diversity, where high heterozygosity is representative of high genetic diversity) for the TSBH were significantly lower than that of the Yellowstone National Park bison population and the Theodore Roosevelt National Park bison population. Additionally, of the 54 nuclear microsatellites that were examined, the TSBH had 8 monomorphic loci (i.e., each loci had only one allele), whereas in both the Yellowstone and Theodore Roosevelt herds there was only one monomorphic locus, indicating a much lower level of genetic diversity in the TSBH. The Yellowstone herd had an average number of alleles per locus of 4.75, the Theodore Roosevelt National Park herd had an average of 4.15 alleles per locus, but the TSBH only had an average of 2.54 alleles per locus, statistically significantly lower than the others. The heterozygosity level of the Yellowstone, Theodore Roosevelt, and TSBH populations were 0.63, 0.57, and 0.38 respectively, with the TSBH again having a statistically significantly lower value. This low genetic diversity found in TSBH is likely due to the critically low starting population, several additional bottlenecks throughout the herd's history–leading to inbreeding depression–, and a continuously low population allowing for genetic drift to have a large effect. Before any addition of new individuals, the rate of loss of genetic diversity was estimated to be between 30 and 40% over the proceeding 50 years.
The inbreeding depression resulting from the multiple extreme population bottlenecks in the TSBH led to a coefficient of inbreeding of 0.367, equal to the level of inbreeding that results from two generations of full-siblings mating.
The Texas State Bison Herd is also a useful example of the deleterious effects of extreme population bottlenecking, with an average natality rate of 0.376 offspring per female and a 1st-year mortality rate of 52.6% from 1997 to 2002, compared to an average natality rate of 0.560 offspring per female and a 1st-year mortality rate of 4.2% for the other bison herds.
Additionally, if it were not for the intervention of conservationists, the Texas State Bison Herd would have most likely gone extinct, as the population bottleneck would have proven to be too severe. Multiple population models based on the genetics of the TSBH in the early 2000s predicted a 99% chance of extinction of the TSBH in less than 50 years, with an estimation in 2004 giving the TSBH a 99% chance of extinction in 41 years without the introduction of any outside individuals (Halbert et al. 2004). Importantly for conservation, another simulation predicted that the addition of multiple (3–9) outside male bison into the herd would increase genetic diversity enough to give the herd a 100% chance of surviving for another 100 years.
Conservation efforts have led the current TSBH population to be at the carrying capacity of their habitat, at around 300 individuals.
Yellowstone National Park Bison Herd
The Yellowstone bison herd in
Yellowstone National Park started with only 25 individuals, and there was evidence of two population bottlenecking events from 1896 to 1912, with a population ranging between 25 and 50 individuals during this time. In 1902, 18 female and 3 male bison from outside herds–the Pablo-Allard herd and Goodnight (TSBH) herds respectively–were introduced to the Yellowstone herd. After the addition of those individuals, the effective population size is estimated to have been Ne=7.2 individuals. The Yellowstone herd was kept completely isolated from 1902 to around 1920, and these previously mentioned founders contributed between 60 and 70% of the genetics of the current bison population at Yellowstone.
Similar to the Texas State Bison Herd, the introduction of new individuals into the population in 1902 likely was the savior of this herd, which now numbers around 5,900 individuals as of summer 2022.
Population recovery
From the late 19th century onwards, the bison population gradually rose from 325 in 1884 to 500,000 in 2017, as a result of careful preservation and a general population boom. Although they are no longer classified as endangered, there are still conservation efforts in order to prevent population crashes down the line.
Hunting
Buffalo hunting, i.e. hunting of the American bison, was an activity fundamental to the Indigenous peoples of the Great Plains, providing more than 150 uses for all parts of the animal, including being a major food source, hides for clothing and shelter, bones and horns as tools as well as ceremonial and adornment uses. Bison hunting was later adopted by American professional hunters, as well as by the U.S. government, in an effort to sabotage the central resource of some American Indian Nations during the later portions of the American Indian Wars, leading to the near-extinction of the species around 1890. For many tribes the buffalo was an integral part of life—something guaranteed to them by the Creator. In fact, for some Plains indigenous peoples, bison are known as the first people. The concept of species extinction was foreign to many tribes.
Thus, when the U.S. government began to massacre the buffalo, it was particularly harrowing to the Indigenous people. As Crow chief Plenty Coups described it: "When the buffalo went away the hearts of my people fell to the ground, and they could not lift them up again. After this nothing happened. There was little singing anywhere." Spiritual loss was rampant; bison were an integral part of traditional tribal societies, and they would frequently take part in ceremonies for each bison they killed to honor its sacrifice. In order to boost morale during this time, Sioux and other tribes took part in the Ghost Dance, which consisted of hundreds of people dancing until 100 persons were lying unconscious.
Many conservation measures have been taken by Native Americans, with the Inter Tribal Bison Council being one of the most significant. Formed in 1990, it comprises 56 tribes in 19 states. These tribes represent a collective herd of more than 15,000 bison and focus on reestablishing herds on tribal lands in order to promote culture, revitalize spiritual solidarity, and restore the ecosystem. Some Inter Tribal Bison Council members argue that the bison's economic value is one of the main factors driving its resurgence. Bison serve as a low-cost substitute for cattle, and they can withstand the winters in the Plains region far easier than cattle.
As livestock
Bison are increasingly raised for meat, hide, wool, and dairy products. The majority of American bison in the world are raised for human consumption or fur clothing. Bison meat is generally considered to taste very similar to beef, but is lower in fat and cholesterol, yet higher in protein than beef, which has led to the development of beefalo, a fertile hybrid of bison and domestic cattle. In 2005, about 35,000 bison were processed for meat in the U.S., with the National Bison Association and USDA providing a "Certified American Buffalo" program with birth-to-consumer tracking of bison via RFID ear tags. There is kosher bison meat; these bison are slaughtered at one of the few kosher mammal slaughterhouses in the U.S., and the meat is then distributed nationwide.
Bison are found in publicly and privately held herds. Custer State Park in South Dakota is home to 1,500 bison, one of the largest publicly held herds in the world, but some question the genetic purity of the animals. Wildlife officials believe that free roaming herds with minimal cattle introgression on public lands in North America can be found only in: the Yellowstone Park bison herd; the Henry Mountains bison herd at the Book Cliffs and Henry Mountains in Utah; at Wind Cave National Park in South Dakota; Fort Peck Indian Reservation in Montana; Mackenzie Bison Sanctuary in the Northwest Territories; Elk Island National Park and Wood Buffalo National Park in Alberta; Grasslands National Park and Prince Albert National Park in Saskatchewan.
Another population, the Antelope Island bison herd on Antelope Island in Utah, consisting of 550 to 700 bison, is also one of the largest and oldest public herds in the United States, but the bison in that herd are considered to be only semifree roaming, since they are confined to the Antelope Island. In addition, recent genetic studies indicate that, like most bison herds, the Antelope Island bison herd has a small number of genes from domestic cattle. In 2002, the United States government donated some bison calves from South Dakota and Colorado to the Mexican government. Their descendants live in the Mexican nature reserves El Uno Ranch at Janos and Santa Elena Canyon, Chihuahua, and Boquillas del Carmen, Coahuila, located near the southern banks of the Rio Grande, and around the grassland state line with Texas and New Mexico.
Recent genetic studies of privately owned herds of bison show that many of them include animals with genes from domestic cattle. For example, the herd on Santa Catalina Island, California, isolated since 1924 after being brought there for a movie shoot, were found to have cattle introgression. As few as 12,000 to 15,000 pure bison are estimated to remain in the world. The numbers are uncertain because the tests used to date—mitochondrial DNA analysis—indicate only if the maternal line (back from mother to mother) ever included domesticated bovines, thus say nothing about possible male input in the process. Most hybrids were found to look exactly like purebred bison; therefore, appearance is not a good indicator of genetics.
The size of the Canadian domesticated herd (genetic questions aside) grew dramatically through the 1990s and 2000s. The 2006 Census of Agriculture reported the Canadian herd at 195,728 head, a 34.9% increase since 2001. Of this total, over 95% were located in Western Canada, and less than 5% in Eastern Canada. Alberta was the province with the largest herd, accounting for 49.7% of the herd and 45.8% of the farms. The next-largest herds were in Saskatchewan (23.9%), Manitoba (10%), and British Columbia (6%). The main producing regions were in the northern parts of the Canadian prairies, specifically in the parkland belt, with the Peace River region (shared between Alberta and British Columbia) being the most important cluster, accounting for 14.4% of the national herd. Canada also exports bison meat, totaling 2,075,253 kilograms (4,575,150 lb) in 2006.
A proposal known as Buffalo Commons has been suggested by a handful of academics and policymakers to restore large parts of the drier portion of the Great Plains to native prairie grazed by bison. Proponents argue that current agricultural use of the shortgrass prairie is not sustainable, pointing to periodic disasters, including the Dust Bowl, and continuing significant human population loss over the last 60 years. However, this plan is opposed by some who live in the areas in question.
Domestication
Despite being the closest relatives of domestic cattle native to North America, bison were never domesticated by Native Americans. Later attempts of domestication by Europeans prior to the 20th century met with limited success. Bison were described as having a "wild and ungovernable temper"; they can jump close to 1.8 m (6 ft) vertically, and run 55–70 km/h (35–45 mph) when agitated. This agility and speed, combined with their great size and weight, makes bison herds difficult to confine, as they can easily escape or destroy most fencing systems, including most razor wire. The most successful systems involve large, 6-metre (20 ft) fences made from welded steel I beams sunk at least 1.8 m (6 ft) into concrete. These fencing systems, while expensive, require very little maintenance. Furthermore, making the fence sections overlap so the grassy areas beyond are not visible prevents the bison from trying to get to new range.
It has been alleged that the Aztec emperor Moctezuma II kept a bison at his private zoo (Totocalli) in Tenochtitlan, observed by the first Spanish conquistadors in the region; this would provide proof of Native Americans keeping bison in captivity, serve as an extremely far range extension south, and be the very first observation of bison by European colonists. These claims originate from Juan Díaz de Solís's interpretation of Bernal Diaz del Castillo's accounts of the totocalli, in which de Solís claims the conquistadors observed "the Mexican Bull; a wonderful composition of divers Animals." However, further analysis of del Castillo's account shows no such mention of such an animal, and the mention of this "Mexican Bull" was likely an embellishment by de Solís.
As a symbolNative Americans
Among many Native American tribes, especially the Plains Indians, the bison is considered a sacred animal and religious symbol. According to University of Montana anthropology and Native American studies professor S. Neyooxet Greymorning, "The creation stories of where buffalo came from put them in a very spiritual place among many tribes. The buffalo crossed many different areas and functions, and it was utilized in many ways. It was used in ceremonies, as well as to make tipi covers that provided homes for people, utensils, shields, weapons and parts were used for sewing with the sinew." The Sioux consider the birth of a white buffalo to be the return of White Buffalo Calf Woman, their primary cultural prophet and the bringer of their "Seven Sacred Rites". Among the Mandan and Hidatsa, the White Buffalo Cow Society was the most sacred of societies for women. Among the Lakota it is associated with Wi, the sun god.
North America
The American bison is often used in North America in official seals, flags, and logos. In 2016, the American bison became the national mammal of the United States. The bison is a popular symbol in the Great Plains states: Kansas, Oklahoma, and Wyoming have adopted the animal as their official state mammal, and many sports teams have chosen the bison as their mascot. In Canada, the bison is the official animal of the province of Manitoba and appears on the Manitoba flag. It is also used in the official coat of arms of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
Several American coins feature the bison, most famously on the reverse side of the "buffalo nickel" from 1913 to 1938. In 2005, the United States Mint coined a nickel with a new depiction of the bison as part of its "Westward Journey" series. The Kansas and North Dakota state quarters, part of the "50 State Quarter" series, each feature bison. The Kansas state quarter has only the bison and does not feature any writing, while the North Dakota state quarter has two bison. The Montana state quarter prominently features a bison skull over a landscape. The Yellowstone National Park quarter also features a bison standing next to a geyser.
Other institutions which have adopted the bison as a symbol or mascot include:


A hippo or hippopotamus is either of two species of large African mammal which live mainly in and near water:

Hippopotamus
Pygmy hippopotamus
Hippo or Hippos may also refer to:
Toponymy
The ancient city of Hippo Regius  (modern Annaba, Algeria)
The ancient city of Hippo Diarrhytus (modern Bizerte, Tunisia)
Hippo, Kentucky
Hippos (Golan Heights), an archaeological site in the Israel–Syria DMZ
Given names
Hippo (Greek woman), a Greek woman mentioned by Valerius Maximus as an example of chastity
Hippo (philosopher), a Presocratic Greek philosopher
Hippo Galloway (1882–1943), American-Canadian professional baseball player
Hippo, one of the mythical Oceanids
Hippo, one of the daughters of the mythical Thespius
Hippo, one of the mythical Amazons
Hippo, one of the Leuctrides
Hippo, a powerful gangster character in the 2015 Neill Blomkamp film Chappie
Brand and product names
Hippo CMS, an open-source content management system
Hippo (company), an American property insurance company based in Palo Alto, California
Hippo (snack), a popular Indian snack
Other
Hippo APC, a South African armoured personnel carrier
Hippo (Hpo), a protein kinase involved in the Hippo signaling pathway
Hippo Family Club, a multilingual club originated from Japan
Hippo (film), a 2023 film by Mark H. Rapaport
"Hippo" (The Brak Show), a 2001 episode
The Hippos, an American band
The Hippos (Australian band)
HIPPO, highest paid person's opinion. It is often a deciding factor in what decisions and next steps a team takes


Australian Mammalogy is a major peer-reviewed scientific journal published by CSIRO Publishing on behalf of the Australian Mammal Society covering research on the biology of mammals that are native or introduced to Australasia. Subject areas include, but are not limited to: anatomy, behaviour, developmental biology, ecology, evolution, genetics, molecular biology, parasites and diseases of mammals, physiology, reproductive biology, systematics and taxonomy.
The current Editor is Ross Goldingay (Southern Cross University).
Abstracting and indexing
The journal is abstracted by BIOSIS Previews, ELIXIR, Endanger (Threatened Species), GeoRef, Science Citation Index, Scopus, STREAMLINE (Natural Resources) and Zoological Record.
Impact factor
According to the Journal Citation Reports, the journal has a 2015 impact factor of 0.872.


A sex organ, also known as a reproductive organ, is a part of an organism that is involved in sexual reproduction. Sex organs constitute the primary sex characteristics of an organism. Sex organs are responsible for producing and transporting gametes, as well as facilitating fertilization and supporting the development and birth of offspring. Sex organs are found in many species of animals and plants, with their features varying depending on the species.
Sex organs are typically differentiated into male and female types.
In mammals (including humans), the male sex organs include the testicles, epididymides, and penis; the female sex organs include the clitoris,  ovaries, oviducts, and vagina. The testicle in the male and the ovary in the female are called the primary sex organs. All other sex-related organs are known as secondary sex organs. The outer parts are known as the genitals or external genitalia, visible at birth in both sexes, while the inner parts are referred to as internal genitalia, which in both sexes, are always hidden.
In plants, male reproductive structures include stamens in flowering plants, which produce pollen. Female reproductive structures, such as pistils in flowering plants, produce ovules and receive pollen for fertilization. Mosses, ferns, and some similar plants have gametangia for reproductive organs, which are part of the gametophyte. The flowers of flowering plants produce pollen and egg cells, but the sex organs themselves are inside the gametophytes within the pollen and the ovule. Coniferous plants likewise produce their sexually reproductive structures within the gametophytes contained within the cones and pollen. The cones and pollen are not themselves sexual organs.
Together, the sex organs constitute an organism's reproductive system.
Terminology
The primary sex organs are the gonads, a pair of internal sex organs, which diverge into testicles following male development or into ovaries following female development. As primary sex organs, gonads generate reproductive gametes containing inheritable DNA. They also produce most of the primary hormones that affect sexual development, and regulate other sexual organs and sexually differentiated behaviors.
Secondary sex organs are the rest of the reproductive system, whether internal or external. The Latin term genitalia, sometimes anglicized as genitals, is used to describe the externally visible sex organs.
In general zoology, given the great variety in organs, physiologies, and behaviors involved in copulation, male genitalia are more strictly defined as "all male structures that are inserted in the female or that hold her near her gonopore during sperm transfer"; female genitalia are defined as "those parts of the female reproductive tract that make direct contact with male genitalia or male products (sperm, spermatophores) during or immediately after copulation".
Evolution
It is hard to find a common origin for gonads. However, gonads most likely evolved independently several times. At first, testes and ovaries evolved due to natural selection.
A consensus has emerged that sexual selection represents a primary factor for genital evolution. Male genitalia show traits of divergent evolution that are driven by sexual selection.
AnimalsVertebratesMammals
The visible portion of eutherian mammalian genitals for males consists of the penis and scrotum; for females, it consists of the vulva.
Male placental mammals urinate and ejaculate through one urethral opening in the penis, while females have two separate vaginal and urethral openings. Male and female genitals have many nerve endings, resulting in pleasurable and highly sensitive touch. In most human societies, particularly in conservative ones, exposure of the genitals is considered a public indecency.
In humans, sex organs include:
Development
In typical prenatal development, sex organs originate from a common primordium during early gestation and differentiate into male or female sexes. The SRY gene, usually located on the Y chromosome and encoding the testis determining factor, determines the direction of the differentiation. The absence of it allows the gonads to continue to develop into ovaries.
The development of the internal and external reproductive organs is determined by hormones produced by certain fetal gonads (ovaries or testicles) and the cells' response to them. The initial appearance of the fetal genitalia looks female-like: a pair of urogenital folds with a small protuberance in the middle, and the urethra behind the protuberance. If the fetus has testes and the testes produce testosterone, and if the cells of the genitals respond to the testosterone, the outer urogenital folds swell and fuse in the midline to produce the scrotum; the protuberance grows larger and straighter to form the penis; the inner urogenital swellings grow, wrap around the penis, and fuse in the midline to form the penile raphe. Each organ/body part in one sex has a homologous counterpart.
The process of sexual differentiation includes the development of secondary sexual characteristics, such as patterns of pubic and facial hair and female breasts that emerge at puberty.
 Because of the strong sexual selection affecting the structure and function of genitalia, they form an organ system that evolves rapidly. A great variety of genital form and function may therefore be found among animals.
Other animals
In many other vertebrates, a single posterior orifice (the cloaca) serves as the only opening for the reproductive, digestive, and urinary tracts (if present) in both sexes. All amphibians, birds, reptiles, some fish, and a few mammals (monotremes, tenrecs, golden moles, and marsupial moles) have this orifice, from which they excrete both urine and feces in addition to serving reproductive functions. Excretory systems with analogous purpose in certain invertebrates are also sometimes referred to as cloacae.
Penile and clitoral structures are present in some birds and many reptiles.
Sexing teleost fish is determined by the shape of a fleshy tube behind the anus known as genital papilla.
InvertebratesInsects
The organs concerned with insect mating and the deposition of eggs are known collectively as the external genitalia, although they may be largely internal; their components are very diverse in form.
Slugs and snails
The reproductive system of gastropods (slugs and snails) varies greatly from one group to another.
Planaria
Planaria are flat worms widely used in biological research. There are sexual and asexual planaria. Sexual planaria are hermaphrodites, possessing both testicles and ovaries. Each planarian transports its excretion to the other planarian, giving and receiving sperm.
Plants
In most plant species, an individual has both male and female sex organs (a hermaphrodite).
The life cycle of land plants involves alternation of generations between a sporophyte and a haploid gametophyte. The gametophyte produces sperm or egg cells by mitosis. The sporophyte produces spores by meiosis, which in turn develop into gametophytes. Any sex organs that are produced by the plant will develop on the gametophyte. The seed plants, which include conifers and flowering plants, have small gametophytes that develop inside the pollen grains (male) and the ovule (female).
Flowers
In flowering plants, the flowers contain the sex organs.
Sexual reproduction in flowering plants involves the union of the male and female germ cells, sperm and egg cells respectively. Pollen is produced in stamens and is carried to the pistil or carpel, which has the ovule at its base where fertilization can take place. Within each pollen grain is a male gametophyte, which consists of only three cells. In most flowering plants, the female gametophyte within the ovule consists of only seven cells. Thus there are no sex organs as such.
Fungi
The sex organs in fungi are known as gametangia. In some fungi, the organs are indistinguishable from each other but, in other cases, male and female sex organs are clearly different.
Similar gametangia that are similar are known as isogametangia. While male and female gametangia are known as heterogametangia, which occurs in the majority of fungi.


The list of mammals of New Hampshire includes all mammal species living in the US state of New Hampshire. Four species of mammals are currently extirpated from the state: gray wolf, cougar, wolverine, and caribou. The list does not include species found only in captivity.While New Hampshire does not have a state mammal, it does have a state animal (the white-tailed deer) and a state wildcat (the bobcat).
Marsupials, order DidelphimorphiaOpossums
Family: Didelphidae

Virginia opossum, Didelphis virginianaNorth America's only marsupial is found in all but the northernmost parts of the state.
Insectivores, order EulipotyphlaShrews
Family: Soricidae

American water shrew, Sorex palustrisFound throughout the state.
Eastern water shrew, Sorex albibarbisPossibly a subspecies of the American water shrew.
Cinereus shrew, Sorex cinereusFound throughout the state.
Long-tailed shrew, Sorex disparSecure and found in all but the far northern and southeastern portions of the state.
Smoky shrew, Sorex fumeusFound throughout the state.
American pygmy shrew, Sorex hoyiSecure and found in the northern part of the state.
Northern short-tailed shrew, Blarina brevicaudaSecure and found throughout the state.
Moles
Family: Talpidae

Star-nosed mole, Condylura cristataStable and secure throughout the state.
Hairy-tailed mole, Parascalops breweriStable and secure throughout the state.
Bats, order ChiropteraVesper bats
Family: Vespertilionidae

Big brown bat, Eptesicus fuscusIncreasing and found throughout the state.
Silver-haired bat, Lasionycteris noctivagansStable and found throughout the state.
Eastern red bat, Lasiurus borealis
Hoary bat, Lasiurus cinereus
Eastern small-footed myotis, Myotis leibii - state endangered
Little brown bat, Myotis lucifugus - state endangeredEndangered and in decline.
Northern long-eared bat, Myotis septentrionalis - federally threatened and state endangered
Indiana bat, Myotis sodalis
Tricolored bat, Perimyotis subflavus - state endangered
Evening bat, Nycticeius humerali Some sources fail to note the presence of this species in New Hampshire.
Lagomorphs, order LagomorphaHares and rabbits
Family: Leporidae

Snowshoe hare, Lepus americanus
Eastern cottontail, Sylvilagus floridanus - introducedFound in southern part of the state.
New England cottontail, Sylvilagus transitionalis - endangered
Rodents, order RodentiaBeavers
Family: Castoridae

North American beaver, Castor canadensis
Porcupines
Family: Erethizontidae

North American porcupine, Erethizon dorsatum
Jumping mice
Family: Dipodidae

Woodland jumping mouse, Napaeozapus insignis
Meadow jumping mouse, Zapus hudsonius
New World rats, mice, and voles
Family: Cricetidae

Southern red-backed vole, Clethrionomys gapperi
Rock vole, Microtus chrotorrhinus
Eastern meadow vole, Microtus pennsylvanicus
Woodland vole, Microtus pinetorum
Muskrat, Ondatra zibethicus
White-footed mouse, Peromyscus leucopus
Eastern deer mouse, Peromyscus maniculatus
Northern bog lemming, Synaptomys borealis
Southern bog lemming, Synaptomys cooperi
Old World rats, mice
Family: Muridae

House mouse, Mus musculus - introduced
Norway rat, Rattus norvegicus - introduced
Black rat, Rattus rattus - introduced
Chipmunks, marmots, squirrels
Family: Sciuridae

Northern flying squirrel, Glaucomys sabrinus
Southern flying squirrel, Glaucomys volans
Groundhog, Marmota monax
Eastern gray squirrel, Sciurus carolinensis
Eastern chipmunk, Tamias striatus
American red squirrel, Tamiasciurus hudsonicus
Carnivores, order CarnivoraCats
Family: Felidae

Canada lynx, Lynx canadensis
Bobcat, Lynx rufusThe New Hampshire State Wildcat is the bobcat.
Cougar, Puma concolor - possibly extirpated
Eastern cougar, P. c. couguar - possibly extirpated
Canines
Family: Canidae

Eastern Coyote, Canis latrans
Gray wolf, Canis lupus - extirpated
Gray fox, Urocyon cinereoargenteus
Red fox, Vulpes vulpes
Bears
Family: Ursidae

American black bear, Ursus americanus
Skunks
Family: Mephitidae

Striped skunk, Mephitis mephitis
Weasels
Family: Mustelidae

Wolverine, Gulo gulo - extirpated
North American river otter, Lontra canadensis
American marten, Martes americana
American ermine, Mustela richardsonii
Long-tailed weasel, Neogale frenata
American mink, Neogale vison
Fisher, Pekania pennanti
Raccoons
Family: Procyonidae

Racoon, Procyon lotor
Ungulates, order ArtiodactylaDeer
Family: Cervidae

Moose, Alces alces
White-tailed deer, Odocoileus virginianusThe New Hampshire State Animal is the white-tailed deer.
Caribou, Rangifer tarandus - extirpated
Whales, Dolphins, Porpoises
Families: Monodontidae, Physeteroidea, Ziphioidea, Delphinidae, Phocoenidae

Various whales, dolphins, and porpoises are sometimes visible off the coast of New Hampshire.


Mammals of Africa is a book series of six volumes from Bloomsbury Publishing.  Published in 2013 and edited by Jonathan Kingdon, David Happold, Thomas Butynski, Michael Hoffmann, Meredith Happold and Jan Kalina, it describes every species of African land mammal which comprise 1,160 species and 16 orders.
Published volumes
Volume 1: Introductory Chapters and Afrotheria, edited by Jonathan Kingdon, David Happold, Thomas Butynski, Michael Hoffmann, Meredith Happold and Jan Kalina (352 pages)
Volume 2: Primates, edited by Thomas M. Butynski, Jonathan Kingdon and Jan Kalina (560 pages)
Volume 3: Rodents, Hares and Rabbits, edited by David C.D. Happold  (784 pages)
Volume 4: Hedgehogs, Shrews and Bats, edited by Meredith Happold and David C.D. Happold  (800 pages)
Volume 5: Carnivores, Pangolins, Equids and Rhinoceroses, edited by Jonathan Kingdon and Michael Hoffmann  (560 pages)
Volume 6: Pigs, Hippopotamuses, Chevrotain, Giraffes, Deer and Bovids, edited by Jonathan Kingdon and Michael Hoffmann  (704 pages)


The placenta of humans, and certain other mammals contains structures known as cotyledons, which transmit fetal blood and allow exchange of oxygen and nutrients with the maternal blood.
Ruminants
The Artiodactyla have a cotyledonary placenta. In this form of placenta, the chorionic villi form a number of separate circular structures (cotyledons) which are distributed over the surface of the chorionic sac. Sheep, goats and cattle have between 75 and 125 cotyledons whereas deer have four to six larger cotyledons.
Human
The form of the human placenta is generally classified as a discoid placenta. Within this, the cotyledons are the approximately 15 to 25 separations of the decidua basalis of the placenta, separated by placental septa. Each cotyledon consists of a main stem of a chorionic villus as well as its branches and sub-branches.
Vasculature
The cotyledons receive fetal blood from chorionic vessels, which branch off cotyledon vessels into the cotyledons, which, in turn, branch into capillaries. The cotyledons are surrounded by maternal blood, which can exchange oxygen and nutrients with the fetal blood in the capillaries.


Beta-mammal toxin Cn2, also known as Cn2 toxin, is a single chain β-scorpion neurotoxic peptide and the primary toxin in the venom of the Centruroides noxius Hoffmann scorpion. The toxin specifically targets mammalian Nav1.6 voltage-gated sodium channels (VGSC).
Etymology and source
Cn2 is a neurotoxin named after and derived from the Centruroides noxius scorpion, which originates from and is endemic in the state of Nayarit, Western Mexico. This scorpion produces a venom in which the Cn2 toxin is the most abundant component; it comprises approximately 6.8% of the scorpion venom. Cn2 toxin is one of the most noxious peptides against mammals. Cn2 was initially purified and sequenced under the name of toxin II.9.2.2.
Chemistry
Scorpion toxins affecting the gating mechanisms of sodium channels are classically divided in two major classes: α- and β-scorpion toxins. However, many functional variations of these peptides have been demonstrated, with almost 10 different toxin subgroups that can be separately listed. Cn2 is generally categorized as a β-scorpion toxin composed of a single chain polypeptide consisting of 66 amino acids,
The Cn2 toxin comprises a triple-stranded antiparallel β-sheet, a short α-helix, and four disulfide bridges. Two of these disulfide bridges contribute to maintaining the relative position of one of the β-sheet and α-helix. The third disulfide bridge binds the long loop between the first β-sheet and α-helix to the C-terminus, while the fourth binds this loop to the third β-sheet. The Cn2 peptide contains many aromatic residues: seven tyrosine residues, two tryptophan residues and one phenylalanine residue. These residues form two hydrophobic patches, a hydrophobic core, two positive patches, and a negative patch in the protein, which have been extensively described.
Target
Cn2 specifically targets the mammalian voltage-gated sodium channel (VGSC) Nav1.6.
Mode of action
It is likely that Cn2 binds most strongly to the extracellular loop between the S3 and S4 segments when the channel is in depolarized state. CssIV, a β-toxin that shares 57 out of 66 amino acid residues with the Cn2 toxin according to NMR analysis, mainly binds to the extracellular loop between the S3 and S4 segments within the second domain of the target voltage-gated sodium channel. The activation curve of the channel shifts to more hyperpolarized potentials upon binding of the neurotoxin. Thus, only when a depolarizing pulse is applied before Cn2 administration, the current threshold of the target channels shifts from -30 mV to -60 mV in control versus 140 nM Cn2, respectively. An explanation for this phenomenon is that the Cn2 toxin ‘traps’ the voltage sensor in activated position when it binds the extracellular loop in activated position, as has been hypothesized for β-toxins in general. The Cn2 toxin also produces a resurgent current and a reduction in peak inward current in the Nav1.6 channel. All these changes seem to increase the excitability of the neurons. However, in Purkinje cells Cn2 can induce an inactivation block in a stimulation paradigm that in control conditions induced regular firing.
Toxicity and treatmentToxicity
Cn2 toxin is highly toxic to mammals with a reported LD50 of 0.25-0.32 μg/20g mouse.
Treatment
Single-chain variable fragments (scFvs) have been used to recognize and neutralize Cn2 from Centruroides noxius venom. Specifically, scFv RU1 and LR have shown to complement each other, showing a better neutralization capacity when administered simultaneously. These two scFvs have affinities in the picomolar range and remove most scorpion toxin poisoning symptoms. When administered as treatment for the Cn2 toxin, survival percentages range from 90-100%


There are 41 species of mammals which are found in the American state of Hawaii. Of these, 24 are native, while the other 17 are invasive. Because Hawaii is so far from other land masses, only mammals which could fly and swim made it to the islands. Of the 24 native mammals, 21 are whales and dolphins. Two more are seals: the Hawaiian monk seal, which is endemic to Hawaii, and the northern elephant seal, which is the second-largest seal species. The last mammal species is Hawaii's only native terrestrial mammal, the Hawaiian hoary bat. The other 17 mammal species are invasive. The so-called "first wave" of invasive species were brought by the Polynesians when they first settled the islands. These are the Polynesian rat and the Kunekune, a Polynesian race of pig. After James Cook encountered Hawaii in 1778, European sailors introduced (both intentionally and inadvertently) mammals such as Norway or Brown Rats, black rats, house mice, feral cats, and feral goats. In 1883, the Indian grey mongoose was introduced to eat the abundant rodent populations on the islands.
In 1916, a group of brush-tailed wallabies escaped a zoo in Honolulu and established a colony in the Kalihi Valley, north of the city.
Order ChiropteraOrder Carnivora (Native)Order CetaceaOrder ArtiodactylaOrder Carnivora (Invasive)Order DiprotodontiaOrder  LagomorphaOrder PerissodactylaOrder Rodentia


This is a list of the mammal species recorded in Turkmenistan. There are eighty-three mammal species in Turkmenistan, of which one is critically endangered, three are endangered, twelve are vulnerable, and five are near threatened.
The following tags are used to highlight each species' conservation status as assessed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature:
Order: Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates)
The even-toed ungulates are ungulates whose weight is borne about equally by the third and fourth toes, rather than mostly or entirely by the third as in perissodactyls. There are about 220 artiodactyl species, including many that are of great economic importance to humans.

Family: Cervidae (deer)
Subfamily: Cervinae
Genus: Cervus
Central Asian red deer C. hanglu LC
Bactrian deer, C. h. bactrianus
Family: Bovidae (cattle, antelope, sheep, goats)
Subfamily: Antilopinae
Genus: Gazella
Goitered gazelle, G. subgutturosa VU
Genus: Saiga
Saiga antelope, S. tatarica CR
Subfamily: Caprinae
Genus: Capra
Wild goat, C. aegagrus NT
Markhor, C. falconeri NT
Genus: Ovis
Urial, O. vignei VU
Family: Suidae (pigs)
Subfamily: Suinae
Genus: Sus
Wild boar, S. scrofa LC
Order: Carnivora (carnivorans)
There are over 260 species of carnivorans, the majority of which feed primarily on meat. They have a characteristic skull shape and dentition.

Suborder: Feliformia
Family: Felidae (cats)
Subfamily: Felinae
Genus: Caracal
Caracal, C. caracal LC
Genus: Felis
Jungle cat, F. chaus LC
African wildcat, F. lybica LC
Asiatic wildcat, F. l. ornata
Sand cat, F. margarita LC
Turkestan sand cat, F. m. thinobia
Genus: Lynx
Eurasian lynx, L. lynx LC
Genus: Otocolobus
Pallas's cat, O. manul LC
Subfamily: Pantherinae
Genus: Panthera
Leopard, P. pardus VU
Persian leopard, P. p. tulliana EN
Family: Hyaenidae (hyaenas)
Genus: Hyaena
Striped hyena, H. hyaena NT
Suborder: Caniformia
Family: Canidae (dogs, foxes)
Genus: Canis
Golden jackal, C. aureus LC
Gray wolf, C. lupus LC
Genus: Vulpes
Blanford's fox, V. cana LC
Corsac fox, V. corsac LC
Red fox, V. vulpes LC
Family: Ursidae (bears)
Genus: Ursus
Brown bear, U. arctos LC presence uncertain
Syrian brown bear, U. a. syriacus EN presence uncertain
Family: Mustelidae (mustelids)
Genus: Lutra
Eurasian otter, L. lutra NT
Genus: Martes
Beech marten, M. foina LC
Genus: Meles
Caucasian badger, M. canescens NE
Genus: Mellivora
Honey badger, M. capensis LC
Genus: Mustela
Steppe polecat, M. eversmannii LC
Least weasel, M. nivalis LC
Genus: Vormela
Marbled polecat, V. peregusna VU
Family: Phocidae (earless seals)
Genus: Pusa
Caspian seal, P. caspica EN
Order: Chiroptera (bats)
The bats' most distinguishing feature is that their forelimbs are developed as wings, making them the only mammals capable of flight. Bat species account for about 20% of all mammals.

Family: Vespertilionidae
Subfamily: Myotinae
Genus: Myotis
Lesser mouse-eared bat, M. blythii LC
Geoffroy's bat, M. emarginatus LC
Natterer's bat, M. nattereri LC
Subfamily: Vespertilioninae
Genus: Eptesicus
Bobrinski's serotine, E. bobrinskoi DD
Botta's serotine, E. bottae LC
Subfamily: Miniopterinae
Genus: Miniopterus
Common bent-wing bat, M. schreibersii VU
Family: Molossidae
Genus: Tadarida
European free-tailed bat, T. teniotis LC
Family: Rhinolophidae
Subfamily: Rhinolophinae
Genus: Rhinolophus
Blasius's horseshoe bat, R. blasii LC
Bokhara horseshoe bat, R. bocharicus LC
Mediterranean horseshoe bat, R. euryale NT
Greater horseshoe bat, R. ferrumequinum LC
Lesser horseshoe bat, R. hipposideros LC
Order: Erinaceomorpha (hedgehogs and gymnures)
The order Erinaceomorpha contains a single family, Erinaceidae, which comprise the hedgehogs and gymnures. The hedgehogs are easily recognised by their spines while gymnures look more like large rats.

Family: Erinaceidae (hedgehogs)
Subfamily: Erinaceinae
Genus: Hemiechinus
Long-eared hedgehog, H. auritus LC
Genus: Paraechinus
Brandt's hedgehog, P. hypomelas LC
Order: Lagomorpha (lagomorphs)
The lagomorphs comprise two families, Leporidae (hares and rabbits), and Ochotonidae (pikas). Though they can resemble rodents, and were classified as a superfamily in that order until the early 20th century, they have since been considered a separate order. They differ from rodents in a number of physical characteristics, such as having four incisors in the upper jaw rather than two.

Family: Leporidae (hares etc.)
Genus: Lepus
Tolai hare, L. tolai LC
Family: Ochotonidae (pikas)
Genus: Ochotona
Afghan pika, O. rufescens LC
Order: Perissodactyla (odd-toed ungulates)
The odd-toed ungulates are browsing and grazing mammals. They are usually large to very large, and have relatively simple stomachs and a large middle toe.

Family: Equidae (horses etc.)
Genus: Equus
Onager, E. hemionus NT
Turkmenian kulan, E. h. kulan EN
Order: Rodentia (rodents)
Rodents make up the largest order of mammals, with over 40% of mammalian species. They have two incisors in the upper and lower jaw which grow continually and must be kept short by gnawing. Most rodents are small though the capybara can weigh up to 45 kg (99 lb).

Suborder: Hystricognathi
Family: Hystricidae (Old World porcupines)
Genus: Hystrix
Indian crested porcupine, H. indica LC
Suborder: Sciurognathi
Family: Sciuridae (squirrels)
Subfamily: Xerinae
Tribe: Xerini
Genus: Spermophilopsis
Long-clawed ground squirrel, S. leptodactylus LC
Tribe: Marmotini
Genus: Marmota
Menzbier's marmot, M. menzbieri VU
Genus: Spermophilus
Yellow ground squirrel, Spermophilus fulvus
Family: Gliridae (dormice)
Subfamily: Leithiinae
Genus: Dryomys
Forest dormouse, Dryomys nitedula
Genus: Myomimus
Masked mouse-tailed dormouse, Myomimus personatus VU
Subfamily: Glirinae
Genus: Glis
Iranian edible dormouse, Glis persicus
Family: Dipodidae (jerboas)
Subfamily: Allactaginae
Genus: Allactaga
Small five-toed jerboa, Allactaga elater
Great jerboa, Allactaga major
Severtzov's jerboa, Allactaga severtzovi
Mongolian five-toed jerboa, Allactaga sibirica
Genus: Allactodipus
Bobrinski's jerboa, Allactodipus bobrinskii
Subfamily: Dipodinae
Genus: Dipus
Northern three-toed jerboa, Dipus sagitta
Genus: Eremodipus
Lichtenstein's jerboa, Eremodipus lichtensteini
Genus: Jaculus
Turkmen jerboa, Jaculus turcmenicus
Genus: Paradipus
Comb-toed jerboa, Paradipus ctenodactylus
Genus: Stylodipus
Thick-tailed three-toed jerboa, Stylodipus telum
Family: Calomyscidae
Genus: Calomyscus
Great Balkhan mouse-like hamster, Calomyscus mystax
Family: Cricetidae
Subfamily: Arvicolinae
Genus: Blanfordimys
Afghan vole, Blanfordimys afghanus
Genus: Ellobius
Southern mole vole, Ellobius fuscocapillus
Northern mole vole, Ellobius talpinus
Zaisan mole vole, Ellobius tancrei
Genus: Microtus
Persian vole, Microtus irani
Tien Shan vole, Microtus kirgisorum
Transcaspian vole, Microtus transcaspicus
Family: Muridae (mice, rats, voles, gerbils, hamsters)
Subfamily: Gerbillinae
Genus: Meriones
Libyan jird, Meriones libycus LC
Midday jird, Meriones meridianus
Persian jird, Meriones persicus
Tamarisk jird, Meriones tamariscinus
Zarudny's jird, Meriones zarudnyi EN
Genus: Rhombomys
Great gerbil, Rhombomys opimus LC
Subfamily: Murinae
Genus: Nesokia
Short-tailed bandicoot rat, Nesokia indica LC
Order: Soricomorpha (shrews, moles, and solenodons)
The "shrew-forms" are insectivorous mammals. The shrews and solenodons closely resemble mice while the moles are stout-bodied burrowers.

Family: Soricidae (shrews)
Subfamily: Crocidurinae
Genus: Crocidura
Lesser white-toothed shrew, C. suaveolens LC
Genus: Diplomesodon
Piebald shrew, D. pulchellum LC
Subfamily: Soricinae
Tribe: Soricini
Genus: Sorex
Eurasian pygmy shrew, S. minutus LC
Locally extinct
The following species are locally extinct in the country:

Cheetah, Acinonyx jubatus
Tiger, Panthera tigris


The United States Marine Mammal Program is an organization developed by the United States National Committee and the International Marine Mammal Working Group of the International Biological Program in 1969, for the study of marine mammals.
The United States Marine Mammal program was directed by an eleven member called the Marine Mammal Council (MMC) that was appointed by the United States Marine Mammal Working Group. Daily operations were overseen by a four member Executive committee that was named by the MMC.
Some notable things the MMC did include aiding in the development of a Marine Mammal Study Center at the Smithsonian, publishing the Marine Mammal Newsletter, sponsoring marine mammal conferences, and coordinating existing and new research through its research program.


This is a list of the mammal species recorded in Malta. There are twenty mammal species in Malta, of which one is critically endangered.
The following tags are used to highlight each species' conservation status as assessed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature:
Order: Erinaceomorpha (hedgehogs and gymnures)
The order Erinaceomorpha contains a single family, Erinaceidae, which comprise the hedgehogs and gymnures. The hedgehogs are easily recognised by their spines while gymnures look more like large rats.

Family: Erinaceidae (hedgehogs)
Subfamily: Erinaceinae
Genus: Atelerix
North African hedgehog, A. algirus LC
Order: Soricomorpha (shrews, moles, and solenodons)
The "shrew-forms" are insectivorous mammals. The shrews and solenodons closely resemble mice while the moles are stout-bodied burrowers.

Family: Soricidae (shrews)
Subfamily: Crocidurinae
Genus: Crocidura
Sicilian shrew, Crocidura sicula LC
Genus: Suncus
Etruscan shrew, Suncus etruscus LC
Order: Chiroptera (bats)
The bats' most distinguishing feature is that their forelimbs are developed as wings, making them the only mammals capable of flight. Bat species account for about 20% of all mammals.

Family: Vespertilionidae
Subfamily: Myotinae
Genus: Myotis
Greater mouse-eared bat, Myotis myotis LC
Felten's myotis, Myotis punicus DD
Subfamily: Vespertilioninae
Genus: Nyctalus
Common noctule, Nyctalus noctula LC
Genus: Pipistrellus
Kuhl's pipistrelle, Pipistrellus kuhlii LC
Common pipistrelle, Pipistrellus pipistrellus LC
Genus: Plecotus
Grey long-eared bat, Plecotus austriacus LC
Subfamily: Miniopterinae
Genus: Miniopterus
Common bent-wing bat, M. schreibersii VU
Family: Rhinolophidae
Subfamily: Rhinolophinae
Genus: Rhinolophus
Greater horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus ferrumequinum LC possibly extirpated
Lesser horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus hipposideros LC
Order: Cetacea (whales)
The order Cetacea includes whales, dolphins and porpoises. They are the mammals most fully adapted to aquatic life with a spindle-shaped nearly hairless body, protected by a thick layer of blubber, and forelimbs and tail modified to provide propulsion underwater.

Suborder: Mysticeti
Family: Balaenopteridae
Genus: Balaenoptera
Blue whale, Balaenoptera m. musculus EN (possible)
Fin whale, Balaenoptera physalus VU
Subfamily: Megapterinae
Genus: Megaptera
Humpback whale, Megaptera novaeangliae LC (possible)
Family: Balaenidae
Genus: Eubalaena
North Atlantic right whale, Eubalaena glacialis CR (possible)
Suborder: Odontoceti
Superfamily:Physeteroidea
Family: Physeteridae (sperm whales)
Genus: Physeter
Sperm whale, Physeter macrocephalus EN
Superfamily: Platanistoidea
Family: Delphinidae (oceanic dolphins)
Genus: Tursiops
Common bottlenose dolphin, Tursiops truncatus VU
Genus: Delphinus
Short-beaked common dolphin, Delphinus delphis EN
Genus: Stenella
Striped dolphin, Stenella coeruleoalba VU
Genus: Grampus
Risso's dolphin, Grampus griseus DD
Genus: Pseudorca
False killer whale, Pseudorca crassidens DD
Genus: Globicephala
Long-finned pilot whale, Globicephala melas DD
Order: Carnivora (carnivorans)
There are over 260 species of carnivorans, the majority of which feed primarily on meat. They have a characteristic skull shape and dentition.

Suborder: Caniformia
Family: Mustelidae (mustelids)
Genus: Mustela
Least weasel, M. nivalis LC possibly introduced
Family: Phocidae (earless seals)
Genus: Monachus
Mediterranean monk seal, M. monachus EN extirpated


The fisher (Pekania pennanti) is a carnivorous mammal native to North America, a forest-dwelling creature whose range covers much of the boreal forest in Canada to the northern United States. It is a member of the mustelid family and is the only living member of the genus Pekania. Although it is sometimes referred to as a fisher cat, it is not a feline.
The fisher is similar to, but larger than, the American marten (Martes americana) and Pacific marten (Martes caurina). In some regions, the fisher is known as a pekan, derived from its name in the Abenaki language, or wejack, an Algonquian word (cf. Cree ocêk, Ojibwa ojiig) borrowed by fur traders. Other Indigenous names for the fisher are Chipewyan thacho and Carrier chunihcho, both meaning "big marten", and Wabanaki uskool.
Fishers have few predators besides humans. They have been trapped since the 18th century for their fur. Their pelts were in such demand that they became locally extinct in several parts of the United States in the early part of the 20th century. Conservation and protection measures have allowed the species to rebound, but their current range is still reduced from its historical limits. In the 1920s, when pelt prices were high, some fur farmers attempted to raise fishers. However, their unusual delayed reproduction made breeding difficult. When pelt prices fell in the late 1940s, most fisher farming ended. While fishers usually avoid human contact, encroachments into forest habitats have resulted in some conflicts.
Male and female fishers look similar, but can be differentiated by size, with males being up to twice as large as the females. The fur of the fisher varies seasonally, being denser and glossier in the winter. During the summer, the color becomes more mottled, as the fur goes through a moulting cycle. The fisher prefers to hunt in the full forest. Although an agile climber, it spends most of its time on the forest floor, where it prefers to forage around fallen trees. An omnivore, it feeds on a wide variety of small animals and occasionally on fruits and mushrooms. It prefers the snowshoe hare and is one of the few animals able to prey successfully on porcupines. Despite its common name, it rarely eats fish. The reproductive cycle lasts almost a year. Female fishers give birth to a litter of three or four kits in the spring. They nurse and care for them until late summer, when they are old enough to set out on their own. Females enter estrus shortly after giving birth and leave the den to find a mate. Implantation of the blastocyst is delayed until the following spring, when they give birth and the cycle is renewed.
Etymology
Despite the name "fisher", the animal is not known to eat fish. The name is instead related to the word "fitch", meaning a European polecat (Mustela putorius) or pelt thereof, due to the resemblance to that animal. The name comes from colonial Dutch equivalent fisse or visse. In the French language, the pelt of a polecat is also called fiche or fichet. Alternatively, Dr. James DeKay, as reported by John James Audubon and John Bachman, claimed the name "fisher" may have been attributed to the animal's "singular fondness for the fish used to bait traps", although this may have been local lore.
Taxonomy
The Latin specific name pennanti honors Thomas Pennant, who described the fisher in 1771. Buffon had first described the creature in 1765, calling it a pekan. Pennant examined the same specimen, but called it a fisher, unaware of Buffon's earlier description. Other 18th-century scientists gave it similar names, such as Schreber, who named it Mustela canadensis, and Boddaert, who named it Mustela melanorhyncha. The fisher was eventually placed in the genus Martes by Smith in 1843. In 2008, advances in DNA analysis allowed a more detailed study of the fisher's evolutionary history. The fisher and the genus Martes were determined to have descended from a common ancestor, but the fisher was distinct enough to put it in its own genus. It was decided to create the genus Pekania and reclassify the fisher as Pekania pennanti.
Members of the genus Pekania are distinguished by their four premolar teeth on the upper and lower jaws. Its close relative Mustela has just three. The fisher has 38 teeth. The dentition formula is: 3.1.4.12.1.4.2
Evolution
Some evidence shows that ancestors of the fisher migrated to North America during the Pliocene era between 2.5 and 5.0 million years ago. Two extinct mustelids, Pekania palaeosinensis and P. anderssoni, have been found in eastern Asia. The first true fisher, P. diluviana, has only been found in Middle Pleistocene North America. P. diluviana is strongly indicated to be related to the Asian finds, which suggests a migration. P. pennanti has been found as early as the Late Pleistocene era, about 125,000 years ago. No major differences are seen between the Pleistocene and the modern fishers. Fossil evidence indicates that the fisher's range extended farther south than it does today.
Three subspecies were identified by Goldman in 1935, Martes pennanti columbiana, M. p. pacifica, and M. p. pennanti. Later research has debated whether these subspecies could be positively identified. In 1959, E.M. Hagmeier concluded that the subspecies are not separable based on either fur or skull characteristics. Although some debate still exists, in general, the fisher is recognized to be a monotypic species with no extant subspecies.
Physical characteristics
Fishers' bodies are long, thin, and low to the ground. The sexes have similar physical features, but they are sexually dimorphic, with the male being much larger than the female. Males are 90–120 cm (35–47 in) in total length and weigh 3.5–6.0 kg (8–13 lb). Females measure 75–95 cm (30–37 in) and weigh 2.0–2.5 kg (4–6 lb). Head and body lengths for both sexes range from 47–75 cm (19–30 in); the tail adding a further 30–42 cm (12–17 in). The largest male fisher ever recorded weighed 9 kg (20 lb).
The fisher's fur changes with the season and differs slightly between sexes. Males have coarser coats than females. In the early winter, the coats are dense and glossy, ranging from 30 mm (1 in) on the chest to 70 mm (3 in) on the back. The color ranges from deep brown to black, although it appears to be much blacker in the winter when contrasted with white snow. From the face to the shoulders, fur can be hoary-gold or silver due to tricolored guard hairs. The underside of a fisher is almost completely brown except for randomly placed patches of white- or cream-colored fur. In the summer, the fur color is more variable and may lighten considerably. Fishers undergo moulting starting in late summer and finishing by November or December.
Fishers have five toes on each foot, with unsheathed, retractable claws. Their feet are large, making movement on top of snowpacks easier. In addition to the toes, four central pads are on each foot. On the hind paws are coarse hairs that grow between the pads and the toes, giving them added traction when walking on slippery surfaces. Fishers have highly mobile ankle joints that can rotate their hind paws almost 180°, allowing them to maneuver well in trees and climb down head-first. The fisher is one of relatively few mammalian species with the ability to descend trees head-first.
A circular patch of hair on the central pad of their hind paws marks plantar glands that give off a distinctive odor. Since these patches become enlarged during breeding season, they are likely used to make a scent trail to allow fishers to find each other so they can mate.
Biology and behaviorHunting and diet
Fishers are generalist predators. Although their primary prey is snowshoe hares and porcupines, they are also known to supplement their diet with insects, nuts, berries, and mushrooms. They have been observed eating small apples during winter. Since they are solitary hunters, their choice of prey is limited by their size. Analyses of stomach contents and scat have found evidence of birds, small mammals, and even deer—the latter indicating that they are not averse to eating carrion. While the behavior is not common, fishers have been known to kill larger animals, such as wild turkey, raccoon, fox, marten, mink, otter, bobcat, and Canada lynx. Raccoons may be killed by a large fisher in trees or on the ground. Fishers can also catch martens on the ground or in the trees, and usually there is either a good population of fisher or marten but not both. Researchers in Maine have found "about a dozen" cases of confirmed fisher predation on Canada lynx, and several more suspected cases, in a four-township area of Maine. According to Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife wildlife biologist Scott McClellan, the fishers involved in these kills attacked lynx bedded down in snowstorms with a quick "powerful grip" bite to the lynx's neck. Signs of struggle indicated that some lynx attempted to defend themselves but McClellan states that "the fishers would finish the cats off pretty quickly. There was some struggle certainly, but it didn't appear to last very long. There were some broken branches, tufts of fur, and claw marks where the lynx was trying to get away." The McClellan study in The Journal of Wildlife Management documents 14 fisher-caused mortalities of Canada lynx from 1999 to 2011 in northern Maine, and found that predation was the leading source of mortality of lynx in the study area (18 deaths, 14 by fisher).
Fishers are one of the few predators that seek out and kill porcupines. Stories in popular literature indicate that fishers can flip a porcupine onto its back and "scoop out its belly like a ripe melon". This was identified as an exaggerated misconception as early as 1966. Observational studies show that fishers make repeated biting attacks on the face of a porcupine and kill it after about 25–30 minutes.
Reproduction
The female fisher begins to breed at about one year of age and her reproductive cycle is an almost year-long event. Mating takes place in late March to early April. Blastocyst implantation is then delayed for ten months until mid-February of the following year when active pregnancy begins. After gestating for about 50 days, the female gives birth to one to four kits. The female then enters estrus 7–10 days later and the breeding cycle begins again.
Females den in hollow trees. Kits are born blind, helpless, and are partially covered with fine hair. Kits begin to crawl after about three weeks. After about seven weeks, they open their eyes. They start to climb after eight weeks. Kits are completely dependent on their mother's milk for the first eight to ten weeks, after which they begin to switch to a solid diet. After four months, kits become intolerant of their litter mates, and at five months, the mother pushes them out on their own. After one year, juveniles will have established their own range.
Social structure and home range
Fishers are generally crepuscular, being most active at dawn and dusk. They are active year-round, and are solitary, associating with other fishers only for mating. Males become more active during mating season. Females are least active during pregnancy and gradually increase activity after birth of their kits.
A fisher's hunting range varies from 6.6 km2 (3 sq mi) in the summer to 14.1 km2 (5 sq mi) in the winter. Ranges up to 20.0 km2 (8 sq mi) in the winter are possible depending on the quality of the habitat. Male and female fishers have overlapping territories. This behavior is imposed on females by males due to dominance in size and a male's desire to increase mating success.
Predators and parasites
As far as is known, adult  fishers are not regularly subject to predation. Predators of the fisher include bears (Ursus  spp), coyotes (Canis latrans), golden eagles (Aquila chrysaetos), bald eagles (Haliaeetus leucocephalus), lynxes (Lynx sp.), mountain lions (Puma concolor), wolverines (Gulo gulo), and possibly great horned owls (Bubo virginianus).
Parasites of fishers include nematode Baylisascaris devosi, tapeworm Taenia sibirica, nematode Physaloptera sp., trematodes Alaria mustelae and Metorchis conjunctus, nematode Trichinella spiralis, and Molineus sp.
Habitat
Although fishers are competent tree climbers, they spend most of their time on the forest floor and prefer continuous forest to other habitats. They have been found in extensive conifer forests typical of the boreal forest, but are also common in mixed-hardwood and conifer forests. Fishers prefer areas with continuous overhead cover with greater than 80% coverage and avoid areas with less than 50% coverage. Fishers are more likely to be found in old-growth forests. Since female fishers require moderately large trees for denning, forests that have been heavily logged and have extensive second growth appear to be unsuitable for their needs.
Fishers also select for forest floors with large amounts of coarse woody debris. In western forests, where fire regularly removes understory debris, fishers show a preference for riparian woodland habitat. Fishers tend to avoid areas with deep snow. Habitat is also affected by snow compaction and moisture content.
Distribution
Fishers are widespread throughout the northern forests of North America. They are present in the boreal and mixed deciduous-coniferous forest belt that runs across Canada from Nova Scotia in the east to the Pacific shore of British Columbia and north to Alaska. They are present as far north as Great Slave Lake in the Northwest Territories and as far south as the mountains of Oregon. Isolated populations occur in the Sierra Nevada of California, throughout New England, in the Catskill mountains of New York and the Appalachian Mountains of Pennsylvania, Maryland, West Virginia, and Virginia.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, fishers were virtually eliminated from the southern and eastern parts of their range, including most American states and eastern Canada including Nova Scotia. Overtrapping and loss of forest habitat were the reasons for the decline.
Most states had placed restrictions on fisher trapping by the 1930s, coincidental with the end of the logging boom. A combination of forest regrowth in abandoned farmlands and improved forest management practices increased available habitat and allowed remnant populations to recover. Populations have since recovered sufficiently that the species is no longer endangered. Increasing forest cover in eastern North America means that fisher populations will remain sufficiently robust for the near future. Between 1955 and 1985, some states had allowed limited trapping to resume. In areas where fishers were eliminated, porcupine populations subsequently increased. Areas with a high density of porcupines were found to have extensive damage to timber crops. In these cases, fishers were reintroduced by releasing adults relocated from other places into the forest. Once the fisher populations became re-established, porcupine numbers returned to natural levels. In Washington, fisher sightings were reported into the 1980s, but an extensive survey in the 1990s did not locate any.
Scattered fisher populations now exist in the Pacific Northwest. In 1961, fishers from British Columbia and Minnesota were reintroduced in Oregon to the southern Cascades near Klamath Falls and to the Wallowa Mountains near La Grande. From 1977 to 1980, fishers were introduced to the region around Crater Lake. Starting in January 2008, fishers were reintroduced into Washington State. The initial reintroduction was on the Olympic peninsula (90 animals), with subsequent reintroductions into the south Cascade Mountains. The reintroduced animals are monitored by radio collars and remote cameras, and have been shown to be reproducing. From 2008 to 2011, about 40 fishers were reintroduced in the northern Sierra Nevada near Stirling City, complementing fisher populations in Yosemite National Park and along California's northern boundary between the Pacific Coast Ranges and the Klamath Mountains. Fishers are a protected species in Oregon, Washington, and Wyoming. In Idaho and California, fishers are protected through a closed trapping season, but they are not afforded any specific protection; however, in California the fisher has been granted threatened status under the Endangered Species Act. In June 2011, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service recommended that fishers be removed from the endangered list in Idaho, Montana, and Wyoming.
Recent studies, as well as anecdotal evidence, show that fishers have begun making inroads into suburban backyards, farmland, and periurban areas in several US states and eastern Canada, as far south as most of northern Massachusetts, New York, Connecticut, Minnesota and Iowa, and even northwestern New Jersey. Having virtually disappeared after the construction of the Cape Cod Canal in the early 1900s, some reports have shown that populations have become re-established on Cape Cod, although the populations are likely smaller than the populations in the western part of New England.
Relationship with humans
Fishers have had a long history of contact with humans, but most of it has been to the detriment of fisher populations. Unprovoked attacks on humans are extremely rare, but fishers will attack if they feel threatened or cornered. In one case, a fisher was blamed for an attack on a six-year-old boy. In another case, a fisher is believed to be responsible for an attack on a 12-year-old boy.
Fur trade and conservation
Fishers have been trapped since the 18th century. They have been popular with trappers due to the value of their fur, which has been used for scarves and neck pieces. It is reported that fisher tails were used in the making of spodiks, a form of ceremonial hat worn by Jews of certain Hasidic sects.
The best pelts are from winter trapping, with secondary-quality pelts from spring trapping. The lowest-quality furs come from out-of-season trapping when fishers are moulting. They are easily trapped, and the value of their fur was a particular incentive for catching this species.
Prices for pelts have varied considerably over the past 100 years. They were highest in the 1920s and 1930s, when average prices were about US$100. In 1936, pelts were being offered for sale in New York City for $450–750 per pelt. Prices declined through the 1960s, but picked up again in the late 1970s. In 1979, the Hudson's Bay Company paid $410 for one female pelt. In 1999, 16,638 pelts were sold in Canada for C$449,307 at an average price of $27.
Between 1900 and 1940, fishers were threatened with near extinction in the southern part of their range due to overtrapping and alterations to their habitat. In New England, fishers, along with most other furbearers, were nearly exterminated due to unregulated trapping. Fishers became extirpated in many northern U.S. states after 1930, but were still abundant enough in Canada to maintain a harvest over 3,000 fishers per year. Limited protection was afforded in the early 20th century, but total protection was not given to the few remaining fishers until 1934. Closed seasons, habitat recovery, and reintroductions have restored fishers to much of their original range.
Trapping resumed in the U.S. after 1962, once numbers had recovered sufficiently. During the early 1970s, the value of fisher pelts soared, leading to another population crash in 1976. After a few years of closed seasons, fisher trapping reopened in 1979 with a shortened season and restricted bag limits. The population has steadily increased since then, with steadily increasing numbers of trapped animals, despite a much lower pelt value.
Captivity
Fishers have been captured live for fur farming, zoo specimens, and scientific research. From 1920–1946, pelt prices averaged about C$137. Since pelts were relatively valuable, attempts were made to raise fishers on farms. Fur farming was popular with other species such as mink and ermine, so the same techniques were thought to be applicable to fishers. However, farmers found it difficult to raise fishers due to their unusual reproductive cycle. In general, knowledge of delayed implantation in fishers was unknown at the time. Farmers noted that females mated in the spring but did not give birth. Due to declining pelt prices, most fisher farms closed operations by the late 1940s.
Fishers have also been captured and bred by zoos, but they are not a common zoo species. Fishers are poor animals to exhibit because, in general, they hide from visitors all day. Some zoos have had difficulty keeping fishers alive since they are susceptible to many diseases in captivity. Yet at least one example shows a fisher kept in captivity that lived to be 10 years old, and another living to be about 14 years old, well beyond its natural lifespan of 7 years.
In 1974, R.A. Powell raised two fisher kits for the purpose of performing scientific research. His primary interest was an attempt to measure the activity of fishers to determine how much food the animals required to function. He did this by running them through treadmill exercises that simulated activity in the wild. He compared this to their food intake and used the data to estimate daily food requirements. The research lasted for two years. After one year, one of the fishers died due to unknown causes. The second was released back into the wilderness of Michigan's Upper Peninsula.
Interactions with domestic animals
In some areas, fishers can become pests to farmers when they raid chicken coops, and instances of fishers preying on cats and small dogs have been reported. However, a 1979 study examined the stomach contents of all fishers trapped in the state of New Hampshire; cat hairs were found in only one of over 1,000 stomachs. An informal unfinished 2011 study in suburban upstate New York found no cat remains in 24 scat or stomach samples, and an earlier published study found no cat in 226 Massachusetts samples.
Poisoning
In 2012, a study conducted by the Integral Ecology Research Center, UC Davis, U.S. Forest Service, and the Hoopa tribe showed that fishers in California were exposed to and killed by anticoagulant rodenticides associated with marijuana cultivation. In this study, 79% of fishers that were tested in California were exposed to an average of 1.61 different anticoagulant rodenticides, and four fishers died from this exposure. A 2015 follow-up study building on these data determined that the trend of exposure and mortality from these toxicants increased to 85%, that California fishers were now exposed to an average of 1.73 different anticoagulant rodenticides, and that 9 more fishers died, bringing the total to 13. The extent of marijuana cultivation within fishers' home ranges was highlighted in a 2013 study focusing on fisher survival and impacts from marijuana cultivation within the Sierra National Forest. Fishers had an average of 5.3 individual grow sites within their home range. One fisher had 16 individual grow sites within its territory.
Literature
One of the first mentions of fishers in literature occurred in The Audubon Book of True Nature Stories. Robert Snyder relates a tale of his encounter with fishers in the woods of the Adirondack Mountains of New York. He recounts three sightings, including one where he witnessed a fisher attacking a porcupine.
In Winter of the Fisher, Cameron Langford relates a fictional encounter between a fisher and an aging recluse living in the forest. The recluse frees the fisher from a trap and nurses it back to health. The fisher tolerates the attention, but being a wild animal, returns to the forest when well enough. Langford uses the ecology and known habits of the fisher to weave a tale of survival and tolerance in the northern woods of Canada.
Fishers are mentioned in several other books, including The Blood Jaguar (an animal shaman), Ereth's Birthday (a porcupine hunter), Egg Marks The Spot (a treasure hunter), and in The Sign of the Beaver, where a fisher is thought to have been caught in a trap.


China's vast and diverse landscape is home to a profound variety and abundance of wildlife. As of one of 17 megadiverse countries in the world, China has, according to one measure, 7,516 species of vertebrates including 4,936 fish, 1,269 bird, 562 mammal, 403 reptile and 346 amphibian species. In terms of the number of species, China ranks third in the world in mammals, eighth in birds, seventh in reptiles and seventh in amphibians.
Many species of animals are endemic to China, including the country's most famous wildlife species, the giant panda. In all, about one-sixth of mammal species and two-thirds of amphibian species in China are endemic to the country.
Wildlife in China share habitat with and bear acute pressure from the world's second largest population of humans. At least 840 species are threatened, vulnerable or in danger of local extinction in China, due mainly to human activity such as habitat destruction, pollution and poaching for food, fur and ingredients for traditional Chinese medicine. Endangered wildlife is protected by law, and as of 2005, the country has over 2,349 nature reserves, covering a total area of 149.95 million hectares (578,960 square miles), about 15 percent of China's total land area.
MammalsPrimates
China is home to 21 primate species including gibbons, macaques, leaf monkeys (including gray langurs), snub-nosed monkeys and lorises. Most of China's primate species are endangered. Both apes and monkeys, particularly gibbons and macaques are prominently featured in Chinese culture, folk religion, art and literature. The monkey is one of the 12 animals of the Chinese zodiac.

The only apes native to China are gibbons. Gibbons are tree dwellers which use their long arms to swing from branches. Gibbons can be recognized by their loud calls, with mating pairs often singing together as a duet.
The Hainan black crested gibbon is among the rarest and most endangered apes. Endemic to the island of Hainan, there are fewer than 30 individuals left in the Bawangling National Nature Reserve. Like many other gibbons, male Hainan black crested gibbons are black in color while females are golden brown. The eastern black crested gibbon is nearly as rare with only 20 or so in the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region along with 30 in neighboring Vietnam. About 99% of this ape's habitat in China has been lost.
The black crested gibbon is found across a greater swath of southwestern China. The Yunnan lar gibbon, a subspecies of the lar or white-handed gibbon, might be extinct in China. The animal was last observed by zoologists in 1988 and its call was last heard by locals in 2002. A survey in November 2007 in the Nangunhe National Nature Reserve yielded no sign of this gibbon.
The northern white-cheeked gibbon is nearly extinct in the wilderness of southern Yunnan where they are hunted by local people as charms of good luck and for their bones which are made into weaving instrument and chopsticks. As of 2008, a captive population of eight northern white-cheeked gibbons was living in the Mengyang Nature Reserve. Two of the individuals were released into the wild but still relied on tourists for food. The eastern hoolock gibbon, which are distinguished by white tufts of hair above the eyebrows, are found in western Yunnan, along the border with Myanmar. The western hoolock gibbon might be found in southeastern Tibet. All gibbons in China are Class I protected species.

The most commonly found primates in China are macaques, which have oversized cheeks to store food and live in large troops. The range of the rhesus or common macaque extends from as far north as the Taihang Mountains of Shanxi and down to Hainan. Tibetan macaques are often seen at tourist sites such as Mount Emei and Huangshan. Stump-tailed macaques have distinct red faces and live throughout southern China. The Formosan rock macaque is endemic to Taiwan. Assam macaques are found in higher elevation areas of southern Tibet and the Southwest, and the northern pig-tailed macaque in Yunnan.
Macaques are Class I protected species in China but their numbers have fallen sharply. Monkey brain is a delicacy in parts of Guangxi and Guangdong, and macaques are often hunted for food. The Monpa and Lhoba people of southern Tibet eat Assam macaques. From 1998 to 2004, the number of rhesus macaques in China fell from 254,000 to about 77,000. Over the same period, the Tibetan macaque population fell by 83% from about 100,000 to only about 17,000.

Snub-nosed monkeys are so named because they have only nostrils and virtually no nose. Four of the five species in the world are found in China, including three that are endemic. All live in mountainous forests at elevations of 1,500–3,400 m above sea level. The golden snub-nosed monkey is most famous and most widely distributed, with subspecies in Sichuan, Hubei and Shaanxi. The gray snub-nosed monkey is the most endangered, with about 700 individuals, found only in Guizhou. The black snub-nosed monkey has about 1,700 individuals living in 17 identified groups in Yunnan and eastern Tibet. A small population of Myanmar snub-nosed monkey was found in western Yunnan in 2011.
Other Old World monkeys in China include the François' langur, white-headed langur, Phayre's leaf monkey, capped langur and Shortridge's langur, which are collectively categorized as lutungs and the Nepal gray langur, which is considered a true langur. All of these species are endangered. Lutungs, also called leaf monkeys, have relatively short arms, longer legs and long tails along with a hood of hair above their eyes.
François' langur is found only in southwest China and northern Vietnam. The range of the white-headed langur is much smaller—only in southern Guangxi and Cát Bà Island in Vietnam. Phayre's leaf monkey is native to Yunnan and a larger swath of Indochina. The capped and Shortridge's langurs live along the Yunnan-Myanmar border. The Nepal gray langur is larger than the lutungs and found in southern Tibet.

Whereas apes and monkeys are grouped as haplorhine or "dry nose" primates, lorises are strepsirrhine or "wet nose" primates. Lorises have big eyes and tiny ears, live in trees and are active at night. The pygmy slow loris and Bengal slow loris are both found in southern Yunnan and Guangxi and are Class I protected species.
CarnivoresCats
China's big cat species include the tiger, leopard, snow leopard and clouded leopard.
The tiger is one of the 12 animals of the Chinese zodiac, and figures prominently in Chinese culture and history. Tiger bones are used in traditional Chinese medicine and tiger fur is used for decoration. The animal is vulnerable to poaching and habitat loss. Four tiger populations were native to China. All are critically endangered, protected and live in nature reserves.
The Siberian tiger occurs in the Northeast, along the border with Russia and North Korea. The Caspian tiger was last seen in the Manasi River Basin of the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region in the 1960s, where this population is now extinct. The South China tiger is an endemic population whose habitat is now confined to the mountain regions of Jiangxi, Hunan, Guangdong and Fujian. A few Indochinese tigers were known to live in Yunnan where six nature reserves have been established for their protection.

Three leopard subspecies are thought to occur in China:

Leopards recorded in Qomolangma National Nature Preserve in southern Tibet are subsumed to the Indian leopard.
The Indochinese leopard occurs in Yunnan Province of southern China, where the Pearl River is thought to form a barrier to leopard populations farther north. Camera-trap surveys conducted between 2002 and 2009 in 11 nature reserves in southern China recorded leopards only in Changqing National Nature Reserve in the Qinling Mountains, but not in Sichuan's Wolong Nature Reserve and other protected areas in Sichuan.
The Amur leopard is native to northern China including the Jilin province along the border with Russia and North Korea, where it has been recorded by camera-traps in Hunchun National Nature Reserve. Leopards cross between China, Russia and North Korea across the Tumen River despite a high and long wire fence marking the international boundary. Contemporary records of leopards exist from protected areas in Hebei, Henan and Shanxi Provinces, and Ningxia Autonomous Region, but not from Gansu Province. Whether leopards still occur in Qinghai Province is uncertain. The species has probably been extirpated in Hunan, Hubei, Zhejiang, Fujian, Guangxi and Jiangxi provinces. It is listed as nationally critically endangered, but receives little attention from Chinese wildlife biologists and conservationists. Fragmented leopard populations in central China have been subsumed to the Amur leopard, as there is no notable geographical barrier to northern China that would have prevented gene flow in the past.
The range of the snow leopard extends across the Himalayas, Tibetan Plateau, Karakorum Mountains, and Tian Shan in western China.

The clouded leopard occurs in forest regions south of the Yangtze River. It became locally extinct in Taiwan in 1972.
The Chinese mountain cat is endemic to China and lives on the north-eastern edge of the Tibetan Plateau. It was recorded only in eastern Qinghai and north-western Sichuan. It was photographed by a camera-trap for the first time in 2007. One individual was observed and photographed in May 2015 in the Ruoergai grasslands.

The range of the Eurasian lynx includes the Greater Khingan Mountains of Northeast China.
Pallas's cat occurs at high altitudes on the Tibetan Plateau and in western China.
The Asiatic wildcat is distributed in Xinjiang, Qinghai, Gansu, Ningxia, Shaanxi, and Inner Mongolia. Within Xinjiang, it has been confined to three southern prefectures: Bayingolin Mongol Autonomous Prefecture, Aksu and Hotan. It is declining rapidly in its natural habitat in the Xinjiang desert region of China mainly because of excessive hunting for pelt trade followed by shrinkage of its habitat due to cultivation, oil and gas exploration and excessive use of pesticides.
The Asian golden cat and leopard cat have been recorded in the Changqing National Nature Reserve in the Qinling Mountains and in the Tangjiahe National Nature Reserve in the Min Mountains. The leopard cat also occurs in the Wolong Nature Reserve and other protected areas in the Qionglai Mountains and Daliang Mountains.
Canines
The family Canidae has many members in China including the dog, wolf, dhole, red fox, corsac fox, Tibetan sand fox and common raccoon dog. Two subspecies of wolf live in China—the Eurasian wolf, which is found in all of mainland China and the Tibetan wolf, which lives on the Tibetan Plateau.
Some of the earliest dogs may have been domesticated in East Asia, and several Chinese dog breeds including the shar-pei and chow chow are among the most ancient in terms of DNA similarity to the gray wolf.
Dholes are now found in only five provinces: Gansu, Yunnan, Tibet, Sichuan, and Xinjiang.
The red fox, the largest fox species, can be found in every part of China except the northwest. The corsac fox is found in Northeast China and the Tibetan sand fox in Tibet, Qinghai, Sichuan, Gansu and Yunnan.
The raccoon dog, one of the few canids that can climb trees, is native to eastern and northeastern China.
Pandas, bears
The giant panda, perhaps China's most famous wildlife species, lives in six patches of highland valleys of the Min, Qionglai, Liang, Daxiangling, Xiaoxiangling and Qinling mountains of the upper Yangtze River basin, which are spread over 45 counties in Sichuan, Gansu and Shaanxi. Only about 1,600 live in the wild (80% in Sichuan) along with about 300 in captivity in Chinese breeding centers and zoos. The animal is rare and elusive. Though classified as an omnivore, the giant panda's diet is over 90% bamboo. Its black and white coloration provides a degree camouflage in the dense forests, but the adult animal has no natural predators. Giant pandas are notoriously difficult to breed; they have short mating periods, and give birth to only one or two cubs per year. The giant panda cub is the smallest baby, compared in proportion to the parents, of any placental mammal. The giant panda is considered to be a national treasure and is an endangered species protected by state law. Since the 1970s, giant pandas have been given or lent to foreign zoos as gesture of diplomatic goodwill.
Other more common bears in China include the Asiatic black bear and the brown bear which are found across much of the country. Sub-species of the brown bear include the Himalayan brown bear and the Tibetan blue bear in Tibet, and the Ussuri brown bear in Northeast China. The sun bear is found in Yunnan. Bears, especially black bears, are also raised in captivity to harvest their bile for use in traditional Chinese medicine.
The red panda - which unlike the giant panda is not a bear and more closely resembles a raccoon - is from a separate family by itself (Ailuridae), and is found in Sichuan and Yunnan.
Viverridae and Herpestidae
The viverrid and mongoose families of small carnivores are represented by numerous members occurring in southern China, including binturong, large Indian civet, small Indian civet, Owston's palm civet, masked palm civet, Asian palm civet, small-toothed palm civet, crab-eating mongoose and small Indian mongoose.
Otter, badger, weasel, marten, wolverine
The largest family of carnivorous mammals belongs to the otters, badgers, weasels, martens, and wolverines, all of which are found in China. All of these mustelids are short, furry animals with short, rounded ears and thick fur, but they differ markedly in size, habit and habitat.
The sable, a species of marten, is prized for its fine fur, which along with ginseng and deer antler velvet, are known as the "three treasures of Manchuria". The sable is found in Manchuria (also called the Northeast) and Altai region of northern Xinjiang. The beech marten of western China and yellow-throated marten of southern China are closely related to the sable.
The Siberian weasel, known locally as the "yellow rat wolf", is the most common weasel in China. It is found throughout China proper and Manchuria, and known to steal poultry from farmers but helps to control the rodent population. Hair from the tail of the Siberian weasel is used to make ink brush for traditional Chinese calligraphy. Other weasel species include the least weasel and stoat in the north, yellow-bellied weasel and back-striped weasel in the south, and mountain weasel in the west. The steppe polecat is bigger than the Siberian weasel and found across northern China.

In Chinese, the wolverine is called "sable bear" because it is bigger than a sable and smaller than a bear and resembles both animals. The animal lives in caves and dens, which they do not dig but take from other animals such as bears, foxes and bobak marmots. Wolverines are fierce creatures that will fight bears and wolves for food. They are found in the Greater Khingan range of Heilongjiang and Inner Mongolia and the Altai Mountains of northern Xinjiang, and number only about 200.

The European otter is found throughout much of Eurasia and China. It is nearly extinct on Taiwan though some have been found on the island of Kinmen, off the coast of Fujian. The Oriental small-clawed otter is the smallest otter species and lives in mangrove and freshwater swamps of southern China and Taiwan. The smooth-coated otter is confined to parts of Yunnan and Guangdong.
Like sable and martens, otter fur is also used make clothing. Sables and wolverines are Class I protected species. Martens and otters are Class II protected species.

Badgers have distinctive white stripes on their faces with one long stripe that extends from nose to tail. The Asian badger is found throughout China proper and the eastern Himalayas. The hog badger has a pig-like snout and has a slightly smaller range than the Asian badger. Ferret-badgers are the smallest badgers and two species live in China. The Chinese ferret-badger is found across much of southern China south of the Yangtze River and the Burmese ferret-badger along Yunnan's border with Laos and Vietnam.
Seals, sea lions
Pinnipeds are also classified as carnivores and are divided between earless or true seals and eared seals. True seals do not have ears and cannot get their hind flippers underneath their bodies to crawl. Eared seals, which include sea lions, in contrast, have protruding ears and can "walk" with all four limbs on land.

True seals in China include the bearded seal which is found along the coast of Zhejiang, Fujian and Guangdong in the East and South China Sea, the ringed seal in the Yellow Sea, and spotted seal, which is primarily found in the Bohai Gulf and the northern Yellow Sea, but have been seen as far south as Guangdong. All seals are Class II protected animal. Sea lions have Class I protection.
The spotted seal is the only seal species that breeds in China. Its breeding grounds are found along the rim of Liaodong Bay in the Bohai Gulf, including the estuary at the mouth of the Shuangtaizi River near Panjin and Changxing Island near Dalian, and Baengnyeongdo sanctuary in the Korean exclusive economic zone. These seals have been poached for its fur and genitals, which were used to make an aphrodisiac. Their habitats have also been heavily damaged by land reclamation, fish farming, and petroleum development. A South Korean NGO has been trying to increase public awareness and support for the protection of the seals in China, North Korea and South Korea. Protection stations have been set up to monitor the breeding grounds and wildlife protection authorities compensate fisherman who turn in live seals caught in their nets. In April 2011, the construction of an express highway along the coast was halted due to its adverse impact on the seal breeding ground. Satellite trackings revealed that not only within Yellow Sea, but also seals can migrate even between Primorsky Krai in Russia to Yellow Sea, exceeding 3,300 km in total. Recoveries and recolonizations have been observed recently, such as along the coast of Shandong in 1999, and in the Miaodao Islands of the Bohai Sea since 2000s.
The northern fur seal, an eared seal, occasionally appears off the coast of eastern and southern China and southern Taiwan. The largest of the eared seals is the Steller sea lion, who lives primarily in the Arctic but is also seen along the Yellow Sea coast in Jiangsu and Bohai Gulf in Liaoning. Among Yellow Sea – adjacent areas within the Korean EEZ, occurrence can be on locations such as at Jeju Island.
Whales, dolphins, porpoises
China has cetacean species that live in both freshwater and the sea. The nearly extinct baiji dolphin and Chinese white dolphin are Class I protected species. All other cetaceans in China are Class II protected species.
In total, 22 species of smaller cetaceans inhabit within Chinese, Taiwanese, Hong Kong's, and Macau's waters including Baiji. Although being not officially recognized, the presence of Irrawaddy dolphins have been questioned.
In ancient China, inscriptions of the whales varied and inscriptions of whales and sharks were occasionally mixed. During the Qing dynasty, certain knowledge on whales had been deepened with the establishment of whaling industries in Guangdong, Guangxi and Hainan although both oceanic and freshwater dolphins had been classified as different animals from whales. It is said that climate change during the dynasty caused small fish to flourish within Yellow and Bohai Seas and drew large numbers of whales into the basins.
The Republic of China was one of the early signatories of the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling. The People's Republic of China signed convention in September 1980 and banned domestic whaling in 1981, and also signed in the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals.
Until recently, observing live cetaceans nonetheless of any species including minke whales and smaller dolphins and porpoises are very rare in Bohai and Yellow Seas within Chinese side, however, increases in confirmation of minke whales and other species have been confirmed in larger part of Yellow Sea basin especially around Changhai County due to improves in water quality and productivity achieved by fishery regulations and creating ocean farms on Zhangzi Island, and local industries have been considered to operate whale watching tours as a future prospect. Modern distributions of cetaceans both on continent and oceanic islands including Taiwan are largely biased on toothed whales due to severe declines of baleen whales.
Baiji
The baiji dolphin's habit historically covered much of the Yangtze River and its tributaries and lakes, from Yichang to Shanghai. It is mentioned in historical records going back 2,000 years. According to legend, the baiji dolphin is the reincarnation of a princess and called the Goddess of the Yangtze. As recently as the 1950s, there were as many as 6,000 baiji dolphins in China, but their number fell to the hundreds by the 1980s, under 100 in the 1990s and fewer than a dozen since 2000.
The Yangtze River catchment area is one of the most densely populated areas in China and the world. The river, China's longest, is also a major highway for ships. Water and noise pollution, commercial fishing, and large propellers of ships are all major threats to the baiji. The building of the Gezhouba Dam in the 1970s and the Three Gorges Dam in the 1990s blocked the access of the dolphins upstream, altered the seasonal flow of the river, and enabled large oceangoing ships to sail on the river.
By 1997, a survey of the river found only 13 baiji. A Sino-Swiss joint survey of the river from Yichang to Shanghai in 2006 found no animals and declared the species to be functionally extinct, that is, even if a few individuals continued to survive, their numbers are too few to reproduce. The last sighting confirmed by zoologist was in 2004 when a dead baiji dolphin washed ashore near Nanjing.
Nature reserves to protect the baiji dolphin were established along the Yangtze in Hunan, Hubei and Anhui province, along with observation and captive centers. The longest living baiji dolphin in captivity, Qiqi, lived in a dolphinarium in Wuhan from 1980 to 2002. The Tian-e-Zhou Oxbow Nature Reserve, created out of an oxbow bend in the Yangtze was designed as a captive breeding area for the baiji. One baiji was sent there in 1995 but died in 1996. The reserve is now a breeding ground for the finless porpoise.
Finless porpoise
At least two subspecies of finless porpoise are known to inhabit coastal waters such as off Dalian< Nanjing, Nanji Islands Marine Sanctuary, Jiushan Chain IslandsWeizhou Island, and at Matsu Islands. A freshwater subspecies lives in the Yangtze, Gan and Xiang Rivers. Unlike dolphins, they lack a dorsal fin. The freshwater porpoise faces the same threat as the baiji. In April 2012, twelve were found dead in Dongting Lake in a span of 44 days. Construction of the Poyang Lake Dam may cause severe damages on remaining population.
As of 2012, the Tian-e-Zhou Oxbow Nature Reserve had about 40 finless porpoises with another 85 in Dongting Lake and 300–400 in Poyang Lake. The freshwater finless porpoise, a Class II protected species, is rarer than the giant panda. They are also well present in Gulf of Tonkin.
In recent years, small concentrations have been confirmed at the estuaries on the mouth of Yellow River in Lijin County. Stable numbers of porpoises, two subspecies being involved, have been found recently along Chongming Island where the local waters show drastic recovery thanks to efforts to improve water quality.
Oceanic dolphins
Sousa, the Chinese white dolphin (locally called the Matsu's fish) that was previously considered to be a subspecies of the Indo-Pacific humpback dolphin, lives in the waters off southern China including Wanshan Archipelago, Nanji Islands, the Pearl River Delta, and Hong Kong, Gulf of Tonkin Hainan Island such as around Sanya Bay, Paracel Islands, and on Penghu Islands to the western coast of Taiwan, mainland coast along the Formosa Strait such as at Xiamen and Xiapu County, and Nánpēng Islands Marine Sanctuary in Nan'ao County, and Sanniang Bay dolphin sanctuary in Qingzhou. The Chinese white dolphin is a symbol of Hong Kong, and special sanctuary has been declared to protect the species with approaches to co-exist with sustainable dolphin watching, although the local population is in serious peril.
Other oceanic dolphin species include the Pacific white-sided, spinner, striped, short-beaked common, long-beaked common, Fraser's, pantropical spotted, rough-toothed, common bottlenose, Indo-Pacific bottlenose, and Risso's dolphin. Risso's dolphins are one of the most common cetaceans along the east coast of Taiwan.
Whales
Whales were historically abundant in Chinese and Taiwanese waters especially in the winter and spring whene they come to coastal areas to breed and calve, while especially baleen whales other than those which migrated from the outer Pacific and Sea of Japan swam northward to feed in the Yellow and Bohai basins during warmer seasons. Most of the large whales in Taiwan were recorded prior to 1952. In imperial times, villages along the coast of the Leizhou Peninsula in Guangdong hunted whales and made offerings of whale oil to the emperor in Beijing. On the other hand, however, like among other nations such as in Korea, China, Ebis in Japan, Indonesia, among Indochina including in Vietnam where whales were once well respected, heavenly deities among coastal people, regarded as the "King of the sea", the "Dragon emperor in the ocean", or "Dragon Soldiers" in almost entire coastal regions excluding above mentioned Hainan and Leizhou, as when whales were seen, fishermen and boats had to make ways for them and wait the whales to pass. In Chinese mythology, for example, Yu-kiang, the ruler of the sea, is said to be a whale with arms and legs. Indigenous tribes on Taiwan also recognized the presences of large whales and representing whales in their local myths and folklores.
Baleen whales found in the ocean off China's coast include the blue whale, the world's largest animal, as well as the Eden's, Omura's, Bryde's, common minke, fin, sei, and humpback whales. Historically, there had been an endemic, resident population of fin whales from the Yellow and Bohai Sea to the East China Sea. Minke whales are also resident in the same regions. Historically, Bryde's whales were resident near Taiwan and the southern coast.
In the Chinese EEZ, critically endangered North Pacific right whales and western gray whales had been sighted in the East China Sea and Yellow Sea only on prior to the 1970s, especially for right whales. There had been records of gray whales and the only record in the 21st century was of a mature female accidentally killed in local fisheries near Pingtan in the Taiwan Strait in 2007.
The following statements focus on right and gray whales because their behavioral patterns (high reliance on shallow waters compared to their size, such that they enter river mouths and estuaries regularly, and their curiosity about humans) made it easier for hunters to kill them and they were wiped out faster than other species, but they also apply to the larger whales. Rorquals' situations were similar, but their functional local extinction was caused later in the 20th century by modern Japanese whaling.
The biology and natural history of whales in Chinese waters prior to exploitation is unclear because academic studies or approaches to biology of cetaceans was minimal. The local populations of migratory whales appear to have been intensively hunted to the point of near-functional extinction on the main migratory collider (the Japanese archipelago) by Japanese whaling industries. The fates of right whales, for example, were threatened by legal, illegal and research whaling, and the most devastatingly, the Soviet Union's mass illegal whaling in the 1960s and 1970s.
Gray whales migrating on the coasts of Japanese were wiped out earlier than their Korean counterparts. Other populations along the Korean Peninsula were targeted later. The most intensive hunts of all times were carried out by Japanese whaling industries in the 20th century; these covered a wide range of east Asian waters including almost entire EEZ of China, North Korea and South Korea. Whaling stations, such as at Daya Bay, were established along the Chinese and Korean coastlines causing virtual, functional extinction of almost all species of larger baleen whales in east and southeast Asian nations. The presence of larger cetaceans has not been confirmed.
Toothed whales, excluding dolphins, include the sperm, dwarf sperm, pygmy sperm, Baird's beaked, Longman's beaked, Cuvier's beaked, Blainville's beaked, ginkgo-toothed beaked whales, and the orca and pilot whales (false killer, pygmy killer, melon-headed, short-finned pilot). False killers still remain along coasts of mainland China, and are known to enter rivers regularly in particular regions.
Stranding of toothed whales has been common on Taiwanese coasts.
Large whales have become very rare on today's Chinese coasts where only tiny remnants of minke whales or several more survived. However, whale watching industries became popular attractions along the east coast of Taiwan, offering excellent opportunities to observe majestic creatures, especially in the summer. Recently, whale watching has been considered in the Yellow Sea based on recoveries whale populations. Larger rorquals have been sighted in pelagic waters occasionally. Whales migrating through Tsushima Strait possibly to Chinese waters are under serious threat of being struck by high-speed vessels.
Older and modern whaling records suggest that there had been historical summering and wintering/calving grounds for baleen whales in various areas along coastal China particularly in several locations. Below is a list showing some of those areas corresponding with baleen and few of larger toothed whales, but excluding undiscovered or unstudied regions and species.
Baleen whales
Right whales – Yellow Sea (especially adjacent to the island of Haiyang Dao where the junction of warmer and colder ocean currents exists nearby and all the modern appearances of the species on mainland coasts of China were concentrated), Shanghai and Zhoushan Islands, Guangdong and Huiyang, and in Taiwan Strait such as along coasts of Fujian (e.g.Pingtan Island), Penghu Islands, and Taiwan, and some reaching Hainan and Leizhou The first documented stranding of the species in China was in Shandong Province between 2000 and 2006. The first sighting in China was at Shenzhen in 2015 although the observation was reported as a humpback, and the first of living animal in Sea of Japan since after the whaling was recorded at Namhae near Busan in February 2015 and this was the first confirmation of the species since after the last record in Korean EEZ in 1974. Since 1901, records have been concentrated to the vicinity of Amami Ōshima including sightings in 1997 and 2014, and the first confirmed whale in west coast of Kyushu strayed into the port of Ushibuka, Kumamoto in 2014.
Based on studies to find coastal foraging grounds, wintering distributions may also include areas along the Zhejiang coast. It is unknown if there had been a summer population of this species to in the Yellow and Bohai seas, however copepods within the basins and the geography indicate some whales might have summered there.
Gray and humpback whales – Yellow and Bohai Sea such as at Qingdao, Zhoushan Islands, Taiwan, Zhejiang, Guangdong, Nánpēng Islands, Liaonin, Fujian to south of Hailing Bay, Daya Bay, Hong Kong, Hainan, Qizhou Liedao Islands (humpback), Wailuo Harbour, Paracel Islands, and so on.
Only about 130 gray whales survive today, but some recent studies indicate that the original Asian population might have been functionally extinct, and those whales seen on Sakhalin and Kamchatka could originate in the well-recovering eastern population. Fossil and catch records suggest there were once wintering/calving areas in Taiwan and adjacent areas. The most recent known record in Korean waters was the sighting of a pair off Bangeojin, Ulsan in 1977.
In 2011, gray whales were acoustically detected among pelagic waters in the East China Sea between China and Japan.
Historical catches of humpbacks on the southern coasts of the nation were small, hence it is difficult to determine the population before exploitation. There was once a foraging area on the southern coasts along the Bashi Channel around Kenting National Park or near the southern coasts and islands of Taiwan like Xiaoliuqiu Island and Dapeng Bay. Today, their numbers along the east coast of Taiwan are very small despite efforts of whale-watching companies. Sightings, including of a cow-calf pair, have occurred the along east coast of Taiwan. Whales were once abundant near Pingtung County and sporadic individuals have been observed off the east coast, Hualien and at islands such as Green Island and Orchid Island. The first confirmation in Taiwan was of a pair off Hualien in 1994, and there was a successful unentanglement off Taitung in 1999. In 2000 a whale was sighted around Orchid Island and sightings have been reported almost annually at Green Island and Orchid Island, however, relative short stays in these waters indicate that they are not winter foraging grounds. There were documented sightings of humpback whales around Hong Kong in 2009 and 2016. Possibly the first confirmed sighting, in the Yellow Sea, was of three animals including a cow-calf pair off Changhai County in 2015. Few whales now migrate through the Sea of Japan, the Tsushima Strait, and further reaching the Korean Peninsula.
Based on historical catches and observations, some gray whales could have occurred year round off China, possibly summering in the Bohai Sea. There had been at least 24 records of gray whales in Chinese waters since 1933 including sightings, strandings, and bycatch. DNA analysis of a 2011 specimen indicates that this female might not originate in the western population. Whether or not humpback whales ever summered within Yellow and Bohai basins is unknown.
Bryde's or Eden's whales – Historically residential among Taiwan, Fujian and Guangdong to Hong Kong, Hainan and Leizhou, and Gulf of Tonkin such as off Weizhou and Xieyang Islands. There have been occasional reported sightings in areas within Hong Kong and Macau to the Gulf of Tonkin, and strandings had been reported from areas such as Zhoushan. The number of whales currently migrating through Tsushima Strait is not clear although they have been observed on numerous occasions by the Japan Coast Guard. Twenty-four Bryde's or Eden's whales were caught in the Korean EEZ in the mid-1970s, and one was sighted in the Sea of Japan in 1994.
Fin whales – Historically resident in the Yellow and Bohai seas and east to the South China Sea off the Paracel Islands, and at least two other local groups, Sea of Japan residents and a group once migrated along the Pacific side of the Japanese archipelago to Chinese waters The East China Sea group is considered to be either functionally extinct or critically endangered due to being one of main targets of Japanese whaling in the 20th century, and today there have been occasional strandings or findings of deceased individuals along sporadic areas from the Yellow and Bohai seas to other parts including southern shores like at Kam District in Wenchang, Shanghai (although the whale was speculated to have died in offshore waters), and Ningbo. The last confirmed sighting near Taiwan is unknown although some media and tourism operators claim that migrations still occur, and whales might still migrate in pelagic waters. The only modern record among the Ryukyu Islands was of a rotten carcass beached on Ishigaki Island in 2005. The last of known record on the Korean Peninsula was in 1973, but there have been recent by-catches along the coasts. Some whales still live in the Sea of Japan and pass through the Tsushima Strait. There had been congregation areas adjacent to Korean Peninsula such as in East Korea Bay and Ulleungdo, although occurrences in these locations are unclear.
Fin whales in the Yellow Sea could have been a unique form from outer Pacific populations due to their smaller size, and breeding season was mainly in winter.
Minke whales – Still be present regularly (although very rare to observe live individuals) in the Yellow and Bohai seas (resident group), Zhoushan, and in coastal and oceanic island areas (e.g. Zhoushan, Penghu, and Parcel Archipelagos). Likely to breed in early to mid – summer, and there may be four major migratory routes within the Yellow and Bohai seas such as along Liaoning Bay, Bohai Strait, and Shandong Peninsula. Off Taiwan, recent sightings and entanglements occurred along the east coast such as at San Diego, Taiwan Strait, or at Hualien. Strandings and by-catches have been in higher rates in the Bohai Sea and at the islands of Haiyang and Zhangzi.
Blue, sei and Omura's whales – Largely unknown. Blues were known to visit the Yellow and Bohai seas and migrate further south to the Paracel Islands. One was sighted off Weizhou Island in 2017.
Blue whales in the coastal northwestern Pacific likely became extinct due to heavy exploitation in the 20th century along southern Japan especially on Wakayama and Shikoku and Miyazaki where the last known catches in the East China Sea (Amami Oshima) were in 1934. The most recent recorded stranding on the Japanese archipelago, other than the Ryukyu Islands, was in the 1950s, and only three blue whales were recorded in Far Eastern Russian waters from 1994 to 2004. Gigantic whales exceeding 20 m in length have been observed in the Tsushima Strait in recent years although their species are unknown. There was a stranding in Wanning in 2005. It is unclear if the whales confirmed in the Bohol Sea in recent years include of the blue whales which had been seen in the Chinese EEZ; it was speculated that these were pygmy blue whales from the Southern Hemisphere.
Historic distributions, occurrences, and current statuses of sei, Bryde's (offshore form) and Omura's whales in Chinese and Korean waters are unclear, but their known ranges in Chinese waters reach from the mid to southern coasts facing from the East China Sea and Taiwan to the South China Sea. Scientific confirmation of Omura's whales among continental waters was rather recent. Strandings of Omura's whales have been recorded only south of Zhejiang County. Occasionally, either Bryde's or Omura's whales have been spotted along Taiwan's east coast during whales-watch cruises. There have been sightings along the Taiwanese coast in Hualien and there was a case of re-floating a stranded Bryde's whale near Nantong in 2005.
Toothed whales
Sperm whales – The only large cetacean still common in the nation's waters were one of the main targets of whale-watching industries along the east coast of Taiwan, as well as islands such as the Xiaoliuqiu and Spratly Islands.  Occasionally whales strand on mainland shores in the Yellow and Bohai regions. They appear seldom in near-shore waters because they feed mostly in deep sea canyons. Sperm whales appear in near-shore waters in some cases; at locations where deep waters approach shores, or some particular individuals or groups have learned to come to rest in shallow bays, straits or along beaches. There were sightings of nine whales in the East China Sea off the Korean Peninsula in 1999, and eight whales off the eastern Korean Peninsula in 2004. The last catches were of five whales off Ulsan in 1911.
Baird's beaked whales – The second largest of the Odontoceti are extreme divers second only to sperm whales. Next to nothing about this species' natural history and biology in Chinese waters is clear as the species has been considered not to occur, and the origin of the skeleton at the Zhejiang Museum of natural History is unclear. This species could still be within the Chinese EEZ as some groups on the Japanese archipelago survive, but are under serious danger from commercial whaling. Based on archeological reports, these elusive, friendly whales once were regular among the Yellow and Bohai seas notably around Lingshan Island off Huangdao District or the mouth of Jiaozhou Bay and off Dalian at least until the mid-16th century, but they were seemingly wiped out by Japanese whalers. Southern limits of their distributions in Chinese waters are unclear while a stranding or a catch was recorded in Zhoushan in the 1950s. Twelve whales were caught as bycatch along the eastern Korean Peninsula between 1996 and 2012.
Longman's beaked whales and other beaked whales – Being one of newly classified and less known species, their overall distributions have been rather unclear. They are the second largest of beaked whales and third largest of toothed whales that can be seen in the Chinese EEZ. In Chinese waters records of these whales are concentrated on the east coast of Taiwan and surrounding waters including Lanyu and Green Island. Based on studies, presences of other beaked whales, being lesser known as well, have been confirmed to be common around Taiwanese waters, and Taiwan is one of few locations where beaked whales have been observed with regularity during whale watching tours. Stejneger's beaked whales are resident in the Sea of Japan, and are one of the most commonly recorded Ziphiidae species of the Korean Peninsula although their presence within the Yellow Sea is unclear.
Orcas – The current status of killer whales along the nation's coasts and surrounding areas is unclear. Sightings are more common along the eastern Taiwanese coasts such as off Chenggong while on the mainland, they occur on almost the entire shoreline from the Bohai and Yellow Sea in the north to Ningbo and Zhoushan Archipelago in the east, and along the southern coasts and islands including Paracel Islands as well. There was a commercial catch newar southern Taiwan in the 1990s. They still occur occasionally in the Korean side of the Yellow Sea or nearby; there was a sighting of pairs in 2001 and five or six whales off Wando (island) within the Dadohaehaesang National Park in 2016.
Short-finned pilot whales – The so-called the "Southern Form" of the species ranges within the Chinese waters. Most of records concentrate on the eastern coasts of Taiwan. Mainland distributions are rather unclear as there had been only one stranding record in Hainan, including regularities of occurrences within the Yellow Sea, but occasional strandings have been recorded such as at Taeanhaean National Park and Jeju. There was a mass stranding on the Nanji Islands in 2004.
False killer whales – One of few species surviving today in descent numbers on mainland coasts, but in peril; any warmer regions such as Taiwan, Nánpēng Islands, Nanji Island Marine Sanctuary, Matsu Islands, Langyatai on Huangdao District, Dongshan County, Hong Kong, Paracel Islands, and so on.
False killer whales along continental China are known to often enter and swim up large rivers in pods or large numbered schools, reaching more than 30 to 50 km, or individuals have traveled 220 to 300 km. Rivers and canals in Xiangshui County such as Guanhe, Jiangsu, Huai, and Tongyu (通榆河) rivers have local legends of "鲸拜龙王" (Worshiped Whale Dragon King), telling that every spring whales gather at river mouths and swim up. In recent years, especially from earlier 2000s, false killer whales have been observed to swim up rivers rather regularly, showing dramatic recoveries and their numbers are rising once again, up to more than 200 whales. Whales occasionally appear in Jiaozhou Bay which was part of the regular range for the species until in the 1980s.
Dugongs
Dugongs are marine mammals that feed entirely on vegetation such as seagrass. They are related to manatees in the Western Hemisphere, and are only sirenian species found in Asian waters. In China, dugongs are found along the coasts of the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, where the Hepu Dugong National Nature Reserve, near Beihai, was created in 1992 for their protection, and less frequently in Hainan. Current distributions could be much more restricted than that of pre-exploitation ranges, as once might have been seen in the Yellow sea regions.
They are considered regionally extinct in Taiwan. The dugong is a Class I protected species. They were hunted for their meat in the late 1950s and early 1960s during the Great Leap Forward. Dugongs are threatened by the loss of seagrass beds from coastal development. Several areas still possess feasible habitats for dugongs today such as the Dongsha Atoll and the west coasts of Hainan and Leizhou Peninsula, and Chinese government funded to establish a sanctuary designed for dugong and mangrove conservation ranging from Hepu County to Shankou in Guanxi, also to secure local Chinese white dolphins. Individuals distributed among the Beibu Gulf Economic Rim in Gulf of Tonkin face threats of busy-becoming ship-lanes and polluted waters.
Elephant
Asian elephants once roamed a large swath of China, but are now confined to the Xishuangbanna and Pu'er Prefectures of southern Yunnan. Xishuangbana means 12 elephants in the local Thai language. In recent years, Chinese demand for ivory has led to a sharp increase in elephant poaching around the world. Due to strict enforcement of elephant protection laws with capital punishment for poachers and government financed feeding programs, the population of elephants within China from 1994 to 2014 roughly doubled to nearly 300.
Odd-toed ungulatesRhino
Records and artwork from antiquity indicate that three species of Asian rhinoceros, the Indian, Javan and Sumatran, more specially the Northern Sumatran rhinoceros have lived in China. During the Shang dynasty, some 3,000 years ago, rhinoceros ranged as far north as Inner Mongolia. By the beginning of the Han dynasty, 2,200 years ago, they had disappeared from the Central Plains of northern China.
During the Tang dynasty, about 1,200 years ago, rhinos were found across southern China and the imperial zoo had a captive breeding program that returned some animals to the wild. Cooler climate in northern China may have caused rhinoceros habitat to shrink, but it was demand for rhino horns for use in traditional Chinese medicine, documented in as early as the Song dynasty 1,000 years ago, that drove the animal toward extinction.
In the Ming dynasty about 650 years ago, rhinoceros were confined to Yunnan and Guizhou, and by the Qing dynasty to only Yunnan. The Qing government limited the hunting of rhinos to only officials, and some 300 horns were harvested between 1900 and 1910. The collapse of the Qing dynasty in 1911 allowed individuals to hunt the animal. The last Sumatran rhino was killed in 1916, the last Indian rhino in 1920 and the last Javan rhino in 1922.
In 2010, a herd of nine southern white rhinoceros were imported from South Africa and shipped to Yunnan, where they were kept in a wild animal park for acclimation. In March 2013, seven of the animals were shipped to the Laiyanghe National Forest Park, a habitat where Asian rhinoceros once lived. Two of the African rhinos began the process of being released into the wild on 13 May 2014.
Horses and wild asses
The Przewalski's horse, the only species of wild horses never to have been domesticated, once roamed free in large parts of northwestern China but became locally extinct in 1957. In the 1980s, herds from Europe have been introduced to habitats in Xinjiang and Gansu.
The other odd-toed ungulates in China are the Mongolian wild ass and the Tibetan wild ass (kiang). The former is endangered while the latter is not. Both are Class I protected species.
Even-toed ungulatesDeer
China has a great variety of true deer and its close kin the musk deer. The largest deer species, the elk (known as the moose in North America), is found in the Greater and Lesser Khingan ranges of the northeast. The moose stands at 2 m tall and weighs as much 700 kg. In contrast, the lesser mouse-deer of Yunnan, which is just 45 cm in height and weighs 2 kg, is not much bigger than a rabbit.
China also contains the closely related elk and red deer, the second and fourth largest deer species, which until 2004 were considered the same species. The elk (also known as wapiti) has four subspecies in Asia – the Altai wapiti, Tian Shan wapiti, Manchurian wapiti and Alashan wapiti – all of which are present in China. The red deer, though quite common in Europe, has subspecies in China that are endangered. The red deer are the deer that have been most important to human societies.

The Yarkand deer lives along the Tarim River in Xinjiang south of the Tian Shan. The Bactrian deer lives north of the Tian Shan in northern Xinjiang and Central Asian Republics. The Tibetan red deer, Gansu red deer, Sichuan deer have been alternatively categorized as subspecies of the elk or the Central Asian red deer.
The sambar deer, the third largest deer species, is found throughout southern China, and on the islands of Hainan and Taiwan. They live near water and are called "water deer" in Chinese. They are not to be confused with the Chinese water deer, a smaller deer which are found in the Yangtze Delta region. The water deer is the only species of true deer without antlers.

Water deer, tufted deer and muntjacs are small deer with long upper canines that protrude like tusks. Muntjacs are known for their soft hide and tender meat. The Indian muntjac is found throughout southern China. The range of the Reeve's muntjac extends north to Gansu and to Taiwan. Fea's muntjac are found in eastern Tibet and the Gongshan muntjac in neighboring Yunnan. The hairy-fronted muntjac is endemic to the mountains at the juncture of Anhui, Zhejiang, Jiangxi and Fujian and is a protected species. The tufted deer, a close relative of the muntjac, is found throughout central China.
Deer is prized in China for the velvet of their antlers. Antler velvet is rich in growth hormone and is used in traditional Chinese medicine. The most valuable antler velvet comes from the sika deer which is raised on farms. Several subspecies of the sika deer, including the Shanxi sika and the North China sika may have become extinct in the wild and survive exclusively in captivity. The Sichuan sika deer, another subspecies, was discovered in 1978 and lives in mountains of northern Sichuan and southern Gansu. The Formosan sika deer is endemic to Taiwan.

Reindeer, which are found in the forests of the Greater Khingan range in northern Inner Mongolia, are domesticated by the ethnic Ewenki and Oroqen people. The Oroqen call themselves, "people who use the reindeer". One branch of the Ewenki rely on reindeer to haul goods through swampy forests. They use reindeer milk and meat for nourishment, hides for clothing and tents, and antlers for medicine and income. The Kyrgyz people, who now reside in Central Asia and western Xinjiang, used to live in northeast Asia and regard the sika deer as a holy animal. According to Kyrgyz legend, the Kyrgyz Bugu tribe descended from a mother deer.
The sika deer is protected as a Class I endangered species by the state, though it is classified by the  International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) as least concern. Another Class I protected deer is the Thorold's or white-lipped deer. This large deer with a population of about 15,000 that is endemic to Qinghai, Gansu, Sichuan, Tibet and Yunnan, is considered vulnerable by the IUCN. The Chinese population of Eld's deer, a Class I protected species that is also considered endangered by IUCN, is found only on the island of Hainan. For decades, the Indochinese hog deer was believed to be extinct in China until a fawn was discovered in 2007 in the Yongde Daxueshan National Wildlife Reserve. The Indochinese hog deer is also protected by the state.

Perhaps the most remarkable endangered deer species in China is Père David's deer. This deer, colloquially known as the sibuxiang or the "Four-Not-Look-Alike", is said to have the hooves of an ox, antlers of a deer, neck of a camel and tail of a donkey, but does not look like any one animal. According to Chinese legend, this animal helped the ancient sage Jiang Ziya overthrow the tyrant king of the Shang dynasty 4,000 years ago and became a symbol of good fortune. Chinese emperors kept the sibuxiang also called milu in imperial hunting parks, even as the animal became extinct in the wild, perhaps as early as 2,000 years ago. By 1866, when Father Armand David identified the animal, there were only 200–300 remaining in the Nanhaizi Royal Park in Beijing. A few animals were sold to zoos in Europe before 1894, when the park was flooded and some of the animals escaped only to be hunted and eaten. The last of the animals in China died during the chaos of the Boxer Rebellion. In 1898, Herbrand Russell, 11th Duke of Bedford assembled a herd of 18 animals from European zoos and bred them at his estate, Woburn Abbey in England. In 1985, 22 deer from this herd was reintroduced back to the Nanhaizi Park in Beijing and in 1986 another 39 were sent to Dafeng, in northern Jiangsu on the Yellow Sea. In 1998, eight animals in the latter herd were introduced into wilderness of the Dafeng Milu National Wildlife Reserve. By 2013, the reserve had 196 Père David's deer.

The Siberian roe deer, once plentiful in the Northeast and favored as game meat, has also become a protected species. Hunting of roe deer was banned in 2000.

Musk deer and mouse-deer resemble small deer but are not true deer. They do not have antlers or facial scent glands. Male musk deer have scent glands that secrete deer musk, which is used for perfume, incense and medicine. Of the seven musk deer species in the world, six are found in China and five are endangered: the Anhui musk deer and dwarf musk deer of central China, the alpine musk deer of western China, the white-bellied musk deer and black musk deer of Tibet. The Siberian musk deer in the northeast is considered vulnerable. The lesser mouse-deer is found in southern Yunnan.
Antelope
The grasslands, plateau and deserts of northern and western China are home to several species of antelope. The Mongolian gazelle, also known as the Zeren or yellow sheep, can run at speeds of up to 90 km/h and gather in herds by the thousands. They used to be spread over much of northern China but are now confined largely to Inner Mongolia. The Tibetan gazelle or goa antelope, is slightly smaller than the Mongolian gazelle, and lives on the Tibetan Plateau. The Przewalski's gazelle, whose males have distinctive horns that curl outward and then inward at the top, are extremely rare and endemic to a small region around Qinghai Lake on the northeastern part of the Tibetan Plateau. The goitered gazelle is about the same size as the Mongolian gazelle and is found throughout the Gobi Desert.
The Tibetan antelope, also known as chiru, is taller than the gazelles and has longer horns. It is endemic to the Tibetan Plateau and is endangered. The animal is poached for its fine wool, which is made by Kashmiri weavers into the Shahtoosh shawl. The film Kekexili: Mountain Patrol documents efforts to protect the animal from poaching. The Tibetan antelope was one of the mascots for the 2008 Summer Olympics.
The saiga antelope's horns are used in traditional Chinese medicine to treat a variety of ailments including the common cold. Despite its status as a Class I protected species, the saiga antelope has been poached to extinction in the Dzungar Basin of northern Xinjiang and is critically endangered in Central Asia and Russia. Chinese police routinely interdict large batches of smuggled horns into Xinjiang. Attempts have been made to reintroduce the saiga antelope to habitats in China.
Goat antelopes
Serows, gorals, and the takin are called antelope by the Chinese, and goat antelope by western taxonomists.
The largest of these goat antelope is the takin, a relative of the musk ox. It lives in highlands from the eastern foothills of the Himalayas to the Qinling and shares habitat with the giant panda in Sichuan and Shaanxi. The takin is a Class I protected species.

Serows are smaller than takins but significantly larger than gorals. Both serows and gorals live in rainy mountainous regions and are excellent climbers. Serows have shorter and coarser wool than gorals. The mainland serow is spread across southern China. The range of the Chinese goral is even broader, extending to Korea in the northeast. The long-tailed goral lives in the northeast, along the borders with Russia and North Korea. The Himalayan serow, Himalayan goral, and red goral are found in southern Tibet. The Taiwan serow is endemic to Taiwan.
Mountain sheep and goat
The argali or mountain sheep, the Asian cousin of the North American bighorn sheep has nine subspecies, seven of which are found in northern and western China, including the Marco Polo sheep, which the Venetian traveler reported observing in the Pamir mountains.
The Himalayan blue sheep, with much smaller horns than the argali, are agile climbers on Himalayan cliffs. The dwarf blue sheep is found in western Sichuan. The Himalayan tahr, discovered in China in 1974, is a Class I protected species with perhaps only 500 animals in southern Tibet.
The Siberian ibex, the largest and heaviest goat, is found in the Tian Shan range of Xinjiang.
Cattle, camel, pig
There are large numbers of domesticated gaur, yak and Bactrian camel in China but in the wild, they are Class I protected species. The gaur or Indian bison is the tallest species of cattle and found in southern Tibet and Yunnan. Domesticated gaur, called gayal, is raised by farmers in Yunnan. Yaks are the largest animals on the Tibetan Plateau. Wild yaks are larger than domestic yaks and slightly smaller than the gaur. They can tolerate extremely cold climate, climb steep slopes, and ford fierce rapids. Yaks are the imost important animal for Tibetan herders, who eat yak meat and milk for food, burn yak dung as fuel, spin yak hair into fabric, make yak hide leather and use yaks to transport and plow fields. Bactrian camels have two humps and can go a month or longer without drinking water. A thirsty Bactrian camel can drink 135 liters (30 gallons) in only 13 minutes. They can withstand extremely hot and cold weather and have broad hooves that do not sink in desert. Bactrian camels are known as the "boats of desert" – for millennia, they were used to carry goods along the Silk Road. Wild camels are critically endangered and found in the Gobi and Taklamakan Deserts.

The wild boar, from which the farm-raised pigs was domesticated some 8,000 years ago in China, remains common in the Chinese wilderness. On occasion, boars will interbreed with farm-raised pigs. The Manchurian wild boar is the largest of the wild boar species. The Formosan wild boar is a subspecies endemic to Taiwan.
Pangolin
The pangolin, a scaly anteater that feed on ants and termites and curl into a ball when threatened, is prized in China for its flesh, which is considered a delicacy and scales, which used in traditional Chinese medicine to treat among other ailments, inadequate lactation in breast-feeding mothers. The Chinese pangolin is found throughout southern China, Hainan and Taiwan and the Sunda pangolin in western Yunnan. In Chinese, the pangolin is called "that which wears mountain armor" and the animal is believed by local shamans to hold magical powers such that hunters must utter incantation before killing them to ward off bad luck. As a Class II protected species, trading of wild pangolins is prohibited, but poaching and illegal trade remains rampant. The pangolin can be farm-raised, but pangolin farms must generally also raise termites to feed the livestock. In recent years, Chinese customs have intercepted large shipments of pangolin from Southeast Asia and Africa.
RodentsPorcupine
The porcupine, called haozhu or "pig with long thin hair" in Chinese, should not be confused with hedgehog, ciwei or the "thorned creature". Porcupines are rodents and hedgehogs belong to a separate order. Three species of Old World porcupine are found in China: the Asiatic brush-tailed porcupine, Indian crested porcupine, and Malayan porcupine. Many parts of the porcupine including the brain, organs, fat, quills and even the feces can be used to make traditional Chinese medicine. Porcupines are raised on farms.
Beaver
In the early 20th century, the Eurasian beaver was hunted to near extinction for its fur and castoreum, a scent gland secretion used to make perfume and medicine. Though the global population has rebounded, the animal remains a Class I protected species. The Bulgan Beaver Nature Reserve in Qinggil County of northern Xinjiang, at the source of the Irtysh and Ulungur River along the border with Mongolia, was created in 1980 to protect the beaver. In 2007, there were 145 beaver colonies with an estimated population of 500–600 beavers in the reserve.
Squirrels
Squirrels are called songshu or "pine rodent" in Chinese but not all species live in trees. The squirrel family includes tree squirrels, flying squirrels, ground squirrels, rock squirrels, marmots and chipmunks, which are all found in China, often in great variety.

The red squirrel common in Europe and the black giant squirrel of Southeast Asia are found, respectively, in the northern and southern parts of China. Other tree squirrel species include the Pallas's, inornate, Phayre's, Irrawaddy, Anderson's, orange-bellied Himalayan, Perny's long-nosed, red-hipped, Asian red-cheeked, Himalayan striped, Maritime striped, and Swinhoe's striped squirrel.
Flying squirrels are found in almost every part of China, from the Himalayas to the tropical island of Hainan to the rural outskirts of Beijing. Flying squirrel species include the groove-toothed, complex-toothed, hairy-footed, particolored, Indochinese, red giant, red and white giant, spotted giant, Indian giant, Chinese giant, Japanese giant, Bhutan giant, Siberian, Yunnan giant (petaurista yunnanensis), and Hodgson's giant. Several are endemic to China.

Flying squirrels are timid creatures that are active at nighttime and use the patagium, a membrane connecting the fore and hind limbs to glide from trees. They do not build nests and live in caves or rock crevices. They also defecate at specific locations, which facilitates the harvest of their fecal pellets. The pellets are made into wulingzhi, a traditional Chinese medicine used to facilitate blood flow and ease pain. Flying squirrel pellets can accumulate on the floor of caves for years and not rot. Several species of flying squirrels are farm-raised to produce wulingzhi.
The groove-toothed flying squirrel, also known as the North Chinese flying squirrel, is endemic to eastern Hebei Province and the suburbs of Beijing in North China and northern Sichuan. The complex-toothed flying squirrel is endemic to southern China.
Ground squirrels, rock squirrels, marmots and chipmunks belong to the same tribe within the squirrel family.

In China, ground squirrels are found in arid regions of the north and west where the animals live in burrows. Ground squirrel species include the Alashan, Daurian, red-cheeked, long-tailed and yellow ground squirrel.
Two species of rock squirrels are endemic to China, the Père David's rock squirrel, which is found across a wide swath of the country from the mountains around Beijing to Gansu and Sichuan, and the Forrest's rock squirrel, found only in the mountains dividing the Yangtze and Mekong River watershed in northwestern Yunnan.
The Siberian chipmunk, the only chipmunk species found outside North America, has six subspecies in China, all in northern parts of the country. The animal is raised as pets and for its tender flesh, fine fur and ingredients for traditional Chinese medicine.
The marmot, called hanta in Chinese for "land" or "dry otter", is related to ground squirrels but are bigger, have shorter tails and are more social animals. They can grow to be the size of a cat and live in large colonies. Four species are found in China, all along the northern and western periphery of the country: gray, long-tailed, Himalayan, and Tarbagan. Of these, the tarbagan marmot is an endangered, Class III protected species. Marmots are also farm-raised for food and fur.
Jumping rodents
A wide variety of jumping rodents belonging to the family Dipodidae can be found in China. These include jerboas and jumping mice, called tiaoshu, the "jumping rodent", and the birch mouse, called jueshu, the "falling rodent" or "stomping rodent". Jerboas, jumping mice, and birch mice all have long hind legs which can be used to make leaps from a bipedal stance.
Zokors, bamboo rats
Zokors and bamboo rats are chubby and furry rodents with short limbs that burrow underground.
Zokors have strong front limbs for digging. Zokor bones are used in traditional Chinese medicine and can substitute tiger bones. The Chinese zokor, Rothschild's zokor and Smith's zokor are endemic to China. The range of the Chinese zokor extends across north China from Qinghai to Beijing while that of the Rothschild's and Smith's zokors are confined to Gansu, Shaanxi, Hubei and Qinghai. The false zokor and Transbaikal zokor are found along China's border region with Russia and Mongolia.
All four bamboo rat species in the world are found in China: the Chinese bamboo rat south of the Yangtze, hoary bamboo rat in southwest China, large bamboo rat in Xishuangbanna in southern Yunnan and lesser bamboo rat and western Yunnan. The large bamboo rat can weigh as much as 5 kg. The flesh of the bamboo rat is rich in protein and low in fat. Bamboo rat oil can be used to treat burn wounds.
Both the zokor and bamboo rat are farm-raised for their fur, meat and use in medicine.
Hamsters
About half of the world's 25 species of hamsters are found in China. Most live in the deserts of Xinjiang, Gansu and Inner Mongolia. Some are named after the specific region in which they are found, such as the Chinese, Mongolian, Gansu, Chinese striped, Tibetan dwarf, Kham dwarf, and Djungarian hamster, and some by their founder, such as Campbell's dwarf, Roborovski, and Sokolov's dwarf. Others include the gray dwarf, long-tailed dwarf, greater long-tailed hamster and black-bellied hamster. The Chinese hamster and Roborovski hamster have been bred as pets and found in homes throughout the world.

Eurasian water vole (Arvicola amphibius)
Mice and rats
Brown rat
Chinese dormouse (Chaetocauda sichuanensis)
Sichuan niviventer (Niviventer excelsior)
Yunnan hadromys (Hadromys yunnanensis)
Gerbils
Great gerbil (Rhombomys opimus)
Shrew moles
Chinese mole shrew (Anourosorex squamipes)
Pikas
Glover's pika (Ochotona gloveri)
Moles
Large mole (Mogera robusta)
Gymnures
Northern short-tailed gymnure (Hylomys peguensis)
Treeshrews
Northern treeshrew (Tupaia belangeri)
Hedgehogs
The Amur hedgehog (Erinaceus amurensis) hails from Manchuria, China.
Hares
Chinese hare (Lepus sinensis)
Hainan hare
Manchurian hare
Bats
Bats, the only mammals capable of sustained flight, are the second largest order of mammals after rodents. They are divided broadly into microbats, which use echolocation to navigate and hunt insects, and megabats, which rely on large eyes and keen smell to feed on fruits and nectar. Bats are found in great abundance and variety throughout China and are considered to be auspicious animals, symbolizing good fortune. Bat feces collected from caves are used in traditional Chinese medicine.
Megabats
Megabats, also called fruit bats, include flying foxes, which are the largest bat species. Four species are found in China, all in isolated populations: the large flying fox in Shaanxi, Indian flying fox in Qinghai, Ryukyu flying fox in Taiwan, and Lyle's flying fox in Yunnan. The large flying fox can weigh 0.65–1.1 kg (1.4–2.4 lb) and has a wingspan of up to 1.5 m (4 ft 11 in).
Geoffroy's rousette and Leschenault's rousette, both dog-faced fruit bats, are the only megabats in China that can echolocate. Unlike microbats, which generate ultrasound with their larynx, rousettes generate sonar sound waves with tongue clicks.
Other fruit bat species include the greater and lesser short-nosed fruit bat, Blanford's fruit bat and the cave nectar bat. Fruit bats are sometimes considered pests by fruit farmers, and are hunted and eaten in parts of Guangdong, Guangxi and Hainan. They also help pollinate certain species of tropical fruit trees.
MicrobatsVesper bats
Vesper or evening bats comprise the largest family of bats with at least 45 species in China. Members include mouse-eared bats, long-eared bats, pipistrelles, noctules and barbastelles.

Myotis or mouse-eared bats are delicate and furry bats with pointed ears. Of the 90 or so species in the world, about one-fifth are found in China.
The lesser mouse-eared bat, pond bat, Daubenton's bat, Natterer's bat and whiskered bat are spread across Eurasia. Others inhabit either the warmer climes of southern China and Southeast Asia including the large myotis, Szechwan myotis, Burmese whiskered bat and Horsfield's bat or the temperate regions of northern China and Northeast Asia including the Far Eastern myotis, fraternal myotis, and Ikonnikov's bat. Hodgson's bat, known for its distinctive golden fur, has unconnected populations in Afghanistan, India, central China, southeastern China, Manchuria, Taiwan, Korea and Indonesia. The Beijing mouse-eared bat is endemic to eastern China, and the long-footed myotis is endemic to southern China and Hong Kong.
Most mouse-eared bats are insectivores. Rickett's big-footed bat, which is distributed across China proper into Laos, lives near water and feeds on fish. The large-footed bat of Taiwan hunts insects on the surface of the water.
Pipistrels and their relatives are tiny bats that flutter like butterflies in flight. The common pipistrelle weighs only 3.5 to 8.5 g (0.12 to 0.30 oz) and has a wingspan ranging of 18 to 25 cm (7.1 to 9.8 in). Other pipistrelles found in China include the least pipistrelle, Kelaart's, Mount Popa, Savi's, chocolate black-gilded and the Chinese pipistrelle. In Chinese, pipistrelles are called fuyi meaning "hidden wing". The flesh, blood, brain and feces of pipistrelle can be used to make traditional Chinese medicine. The brain is applied to the skin to treat acne and ingested to improve memory.

Noctules are closely related to pipistrelles but can be much larger in size. The Chinese noctule, which is endemic to the southern half of the country and Taiwan, weighs three to four times as much as the Chinese pipistrelle. Known as "mountain bats" in Chinese, noctules live in caves and rock croppings as well as the under the eaves of traditional homes. Noctules droppings are collected for medicinal uses. Other noctule bats in China include the common noctule, lesser noctule, and birdlike noctule.

Barbastelles are called wide-eared bats in Chinese. The range of the Asian barbastelle extends from Egypt through China to Japan. In 2001, a Chinese zoologist discovered a new species of barbastelle in the mountains of rural Beijing. This bat was discovered in a cave in Fangshan District where four other bat species—Rickett's big-foot, large mouse-eared, greater horseshoe and greater tube-nosed bats also live.
The Beijing barbastelle (Barbastella beijingensis) was distinguished by the distinctiveness of its DNA and recognized as a species on 23 May 2007, the 300th birthday of Carl Linnaeus. As of 2012, no other populations of this species have been found beyond Beijing.
Long-eared bats have enormous ears that can grow almost as long as their bodies, and are represented in China by multiple species (e.g. Plecotus kozlovi and Plecotus ognevi). The greater and lesser bamboo bats prefer to roost inside the hollow shoots of giant bamboo through holes eaten by beetles. Because the holes are small, bamboo bats are also tiny. An adult lesser bamboo bat that measures 4 cm (1.6 in) in length and weighs 3.5 to 5.8 g (0.12 to 0.20 oz), is not much bigger than a bumble bee.
House bats including the Gobi big brown bat, northern bat, thick-eared bat, serotine bat are also closely related to pipistrelles, noctules and barbastelles. Other relatives within this extensive subfamily include Tickell's bat, great evening bat, harlequin bat, greater Asiatic yellow bat, parti-colored bat and Asian particolored bat.
Tube-nosed bats have longer nostrils than other vespers and funnel-shaped ears. Chinese species include the greater, little, round-eared, Hutton's, and dusky tube-nosed bat. The dusky tube-nosed bat is endemic to Heilongjiang and Jilin in northeastern China. The greater tube-nosed bat of Beijing feeds on aerial beetles.
The painted bat and Hardwicke's woolly bat, also vesper bats, live in the forests of southern China.
Long-winged bats
Long-winged bats in China include the common and western bent-winged bats. The common bent-wing bats can form large colonies and migrate hundreds of kilometers.
Free-tailed bats
 Free-tailed bats, unlike other bats, have tails that are detached from their wing membrances. Species include the European free-tailed bat, La Touche's free-tailed bat and the wrinkle-lipped free-tailed bat.
False vampire
The greater false vampire bat of Guangxi is a carnivorous bat that feeds on rodents, fish, insects and smaller bats. It is smaller than the "true" vampire bats of South America.
Sac-winged bats
Sac-winged bats have sac-like glands under their wings that carry pheromones, which are released to attract mates. Out of some 51 sac-winged bat species in the world, only the black-bearded tomb bat is found in China.
Horseshoe bats
Horseshoe bats are called "chrysanthemum bats" in Chinese because they have horseshoe-shaped folds of skin that unfurl on their faces like the petals of a flower. These noseleaves help the horseshoe bat emit ultrasonic signals for echolocation. Species found in China include the greater, least, king, big-eared, rufous, Chinese rufous, little Japanese, Blyth's, Osgood's, Pearson's, Thomas's, and Dobson's. The king and Osgood's horseshoe bats are endemic to southwest China.
Scientists believe that the SARS coronavirus may have originated in horseshoe bats in China.
Closely related to the horseshoe bats are the roundleaf bats, including the great roundleaf, intermediate roundleaf, Pomona and Pratt's, the East Asian tailless leaf-nosed bat and Stoliczka's trident bat.
Birds
The avifauna of China includes a total of 1314 species, of which 52 are endemic, two have been introduced by humans, and 55 are rare or accidental. One species listed is extirpated in China and is not included in the species count. Eighty seven species are globally threatened.
Pheasants
Chinese monal
Golden pheasant
Cranes and other wading birds
Black-necked crane
Red-crowned crane
Common spoonbill
Reptiles
China has a big variety of reptiles including the Chinese alligator and the Yangtze giant softshell turtle.
Crocodilians
Chinese alligator (Alligator sinensis)
Lizards
Chinese crocodile lizard (Shinisaurus crocodilurus)
Chinese water dragon (Physignathus cocincinus)
Turtles and tortoises
Elongated tortoise (Indotestudo elongata)
Cantor's giant softshell turtle (Pelochelys cantorii)
Yangtze giant softshell turtle (Rafetus swinhoei)
Snakes
Sharp-nosed pit viper (Deinagkistrodon acutus)
Dice snake (Natrix tessellata)
Twin-spotted ratsnake (Elaphe bimaculata)
Mamushi (Gloydius blomhoffii)
Grass snake (Natrix natrix)
Mountain pitviper (Ovophis monticola)
Jerdon's pit viper (Protobothrops jerdonii)
Bamboo pit viper (Trimeresurus gramineus)
Mangshan pitviper (Trimeresurus mangshanensis)
Motuo bamboo pitviper (Trimeresurus medoensis)
Stejneger's pit viper (Trimeresurus stejnegeri)
Amphibians
China is home to 346 species of amphibian. China's amphibian diversity is greater than any other country in the Old World, and it is the 5th in the whole world. China's amphibian fauna includes an important element of widespread, generally non-threatened species though 27.3% of amphibian species are extinct or threatened and because conservation assessments of Chinese amphibians have only started recently, it is likely that the current data on threats to amphibians are insufficient. Several amphibian species in China have very limited geographical distributions.
FrogsTrue frogs (Ranidae)
Amolops aniqiaoensis
Amolops bellulus
Amolops chunganensis
Amolops gerbillus
Amolops granulosus
Amolops hainanensis
Amolops jinjiangensis
Amolops kangtingensis
Amolops liangshanensis
Amolops lifanensis
Amolops loloensis
Amolops mantzorum
Amolops medogensis
Amolops monticola
Amolops ricketti
Amolops torrentis
Amolops viridimaculatus
Amolops wuyiensis
Babina adenopleura
Babina hainanensis
Babina lini
Babina pleuraden
Chevron-spotted brown frog
Eastern golden frog
Emei music frog
Glandirana minima
Glandirana tientaiensis
Huanren frog
Imienpo Station frog
Johns' groove-toed frog
Korean brown frog
Odorrana andersonii
Odorrana anlungensis
Odorrana chapaensis
Odorrana chloronota
Odorrana exiliversabilis
Odorrana grahami
Odorrana graminea
Odorrana hejiangensis
Odorrana kuangwuensis
Odorrana lungshengensis
Odorrana margaretae
Odorrana mutschmanni
Odorrana schmackeri
Odorrana tiannanensis
Odorrana versabilis
Odorrana wuchuanensis
Pelophylax fukienensis
Pelophylax hubeiensis
Pelophylax lateralis
Pelophylax nigromaculatus
Pelophylax tenggerensis
Pelophylax terentievi
Plateau brown frog
Rana amurensis
Rana chensinensis
Rana omeimontis
Rana sangzhiensis
Rana weiningensis
Rana zhengi
Dicroglossidae
Chinese edible frog
Concave-eared torrent frog
Doichang frog
Fejervarya limnocharis
Fejervarya moodiei
Fejervarya multistriata
Limnonectes longchuanensis
Nanorana arnoldi
Nanorana blanfordii
Nanorana bourreti
Nanorana conaensis
Nanorana feae
Nanorana liebigii
Nanorana maculosa
Nanorana medogensis
Nanorana pleskei
Nanorana polunini
Nanorana quadranus
Nanorana taihangnica
Nanorana unculuanus
Nanorana ventripunctata
Nanorana yunnanensis
Northern frog
Kuhl's creek frog
Quasipaa verrucospinosa
Quasipaa boulengeri
Quasipaa exilispinosa
Quasipaa jiulongensis
Quasipaa shini
Quasipaa spinosa
Quasipaa yei
Round-tongued floating frog
Ceratobatrachidae
Liurana
Tree frogs
Annam tree frog
Common Chinese tree frog
Hyla sanchiangensis
Hyla zhaopingensis: only in Zhaoping County, Guangxi
Hylarana cubitalis
Hylarana hekouensis
Hylarana latouchii
Hylarana macrodactyla
Hylarana maosonensis
Hylarana menglaensis
Hylarana milleti
Hylarana nigrovittata
Hylarana spinulosa
Hylarana taipehensis
Japanese tree frog
Chinese flying frog
Chiromantis vittatus
Feihyla palpebralis
Gracixalus gracilipes
Gracixalus jinxiuensis
Gracixalus medogensis
Gracixalus nonggangensis
Kurixalus naso
Kurixalus odontotarsus
Kurixalus verrucosus
Raorchestes longchuanensis
Raorchestes menglaensis
Rhacophorus burmanus
Rhacophorus chenfui
Rhacophorus dorsoviridis
Rhacophorus dugritei
Rhacophorus feae
Rhacophorus hui
Rhacophorus hungfuensis
Rhacophorus kio
Rhacophorus maximus
Rhacophorus nigropunctatus
Rhacophorus omeimontis
Rhacophorus puerensis
Rhacophorus rhodopus
Rhacophorus tuberculatus
Rhacophorus yaoshanensis
Romer's tree frog
Sylvirana guentheri
Microhylidae
Calluella yunnanensis
Boreal digging frog
Kalophrynus interlineatus
Kalophrynus menglienicus
Kaloula nonggangensis
Kaloula rugifera
Kaloula verrucosa
Microhyla berdmorei
Microhyla fissipes
Microhyla heymonsi
Microhyla pulchra
Micryletta inornata
Microhyla butleri
Litter frogs
Brachytarsophrys carinense
Brachytarsophrys feae
Brachytarsophrys popei
Buergeria oxycephala
Leptolalax alpinus
Leptolalax liui
Leptolalax oshanensis
Leptolalax sungi
Leptolalax tengchongensis
Leptolalax ventripunctatus
Megophrys binchuanensis
Megophrys brachykolos
Megophrys cheni
Megophrys huangshanensis
Megophrys lini
Megophrys major
Megophrys parva
Megophrys sangzhiensis
Megophrys shuichengensis
Megophrys wawuensis
Oreolalax chuanbeiensis
Oreolalax granulosus
Oreolalax jingdongensis
Oreolalax liangbeiensis
Oreolalax lichuanensis
Oreolalax major
Oreolalax multipunctatus
Oreolalax nanjiangensis: only in Nanjiang County, Sichuan
Oreolalax omeimontis
Oreolalax pingii
Oreolalax popei
Oreolalax puxiongensis
Oreolalax rhodostigmatus
Oreolalax rugosus
Oreolalax schmidti
Oreolalax weigoldi
Oreolalax xiangchengensis
Scutiger boulengeri
Scutiger brevipes
Scutiger chintingensis
Scutiger glandulatus
Scutiger gongshanensis
Scutiger jiulongensis
Scutiger liupanensis
Scutiger maculatus
Scutiger mammatus
Scutiger muliensis: only in Muli, Sichuan
Scutiger ningshanensis
Scutiger nyingchiensis
Scutiger pingwuensis
Scutiger sikimmensis
Scutiger tuberculatus
Scutiger wanglangensis
Shrub frogs (Rhacophoridae)
Liuixalus hainanus
Liuixalus ocellatus
Theloderma kwangsiense: only in Dayaoshan Nature Reserve (大瑶山自然保护区), Guangxi
Philautus kempii
Polypedates impresus
Polypedates megacephalus
Polypedates mutus
Theloderma asperum
Theloderma kwangsiense
Theloderma moloch
Theloderma rhododiscus
Salt water frogs
China is home to one of only 144 known modern amphibians which can tolerate brief excursions into sea water.

Crab-eating frog
ToadsTrue toads (Bufo)
Ailao toad
Asiatic toad
Bufo cryptotympanicus
Bufo pageoti
Bufo tuberculatus
Bufo wolongensis: only in Wolong Nature Reserve, Sichuan
Korean water toad
Pseudepidalea pewzowi
Horned toads (Xenophrys)
Convex-tailed horned toad
Convex-vented horned toad
Great piebald horned toad
Jingdong horned toad
Kuatun horned toad
Mangshan horned toad
Medog horned toad
Mount Dawei horned toad
Nankiang horned toad
Boettger's horned toad
Glandular horned toad
Omei horned toad
Xenophrys daweimontis: only in Daweishan Nature Reserve (大围山自然保护区), Liuyang, Hunan
Spiny-fingered horned toad
Wuliangshan horned toad
Wushan horned toad
Zhang's horned toad
Other toads
Mongolian toad
Bombina maxima
Duttaphrynus himalayanus
Duttaphrynus melanostictus
Leptobrachium ailaonicum
Leptobrachium boringii
Leptobrachium hainanense
Leptobrachium leishanense
Leptobrachium liui
Little horned toad
Ophryophryne microstoma
Ophryophryne pachyproctus
Oriental fire-bellied toad
Rough-skinned horned toad
Shaping horned toad
Spiny-fingered horned toad
Salamanders and newts
Amji's salamander
Black knobby newt
Central Asian salamander
Chenggong fire belly newt
Chiala mountain salamander
Chinese giant salamander (Andrias davidianus)
Chinese fire belly newt
Chinese warty newt
Chinhai spiny newt
Chuxiong fire-bellied newt
Siberian salamander
Cynops wolterstorffi: only in Kunming City, Yunnan
Dayang newt
Fischer's clawed salamander
Fuding fire belly newt
Guabang Shan salamander
Guangxi warty newt
Guizhou salamander
Hainan knobby newt
Hong Kong warty newt
Jinfo Mountain salamander
Korean salamander
Kuankuoshui salamander
Pachyhynobius shangchengensis
Paramesotriton labiatus
Paramesotriton maolanensis
Paramesotriton yunwuensis
Puxiong salamander
Shuicheng salamander
Siberian salamander
Spot-tailed warty newt
Spotted paddle-tail newt
Taliang knobby newt
Wanggao warty newt
Wenxian knobby newt
Western Chinese mountain salamander
Xingan salamander
Yellow-spotted salamander
Yiwu salamander
Yunnan lake newt
Zhijin warty newt
Caecilians
Banna caecilian (Ichthyophis bannanicus)
Fish
In freshwater alone, China has more than 1,000 fish species. By far the most diverse order are the cypriniforms, followed by the siluriforms. Yangtze is the richest river basin in the country and it is home to more than 350 strict freshwater fish species (as well as several also found in brackish or saltwater). A high percentage of these are endemic to the country and many are seriously threatened. Among others, it is feared that the Chinese paddlefish, as well as several species from the Yunnan lakes (notably Dian, Erhai, Fuxian and Yilong), already are extinct. China has far more cavefish species than any other country in the world.
With a long coastline that ranges from temperate to tropical oceans, China has many marine fish species such as the Pacific cod.
InvertebratesFreshwater crabs
China is home to more than 250 different species of freshwater crabs (families Potamidae and Gecarcinucidae), many of them endemics. It is thus the country with the highest species richness in freshwater crabs. The most speciose genera are Sinopotamon, Longpotamon, Indochinamon and Nanhaipotamon.
MolluscsButterfliesCentipedes
Ethmostigmus rubripes
Endangered speciesConservation
China's first national policy frame work for animal conservation was the September 1962 Instructions of the State Council on the Active Protection and Rational Utilization of Wild Animal Resources. The directive primarily aimed to regulate hunting to ensure that animal stocks were not exhausted, noting that wild animals were an important source of protein as well as products that "have played an important role in improving people's lives and generating foreign currency." It emphasized the idea that "wild animals are the country's natural wealth".
Dingushan Nature Reserve was the first reserve in the People's Republic of China and 19 more reserves had been designated by 1965.
Zhu Kezhen, a meteorologist and vice president of the National Academy of Sciences, was a significant figure in expanding China's view of conservation beyond utilitarian goals. Zhu contended that that animal life had significant cultural value for China.
Disruptions to scientific research during the Cultural Revolution also resulted in disrupting work on animal conservation, which had increased in the period immediately following the Great Leap Forward.
Wildlife conservation discourse in China again increased after Reform and Opening Up.


This is a list of the mammal species recorded in Fiji. There are fifteen mammal species in Fiji, of which one is critically endangered, one is endangered, and three are vulnerable.
The following tags are used to highlight each species' conservation status as assessed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature:
Order: Carnivora (carnivorans)
There are over 260 species of carnivorans, the majority of which eat meat as their primary dietary item. They have a characteristic skull shape and dentition.

Family: Herpestidae
Genus: Urva
Indian brown mongoose, U. fusca, LC, introduced
Small Indian mongoose, U. auropunctata LC introduced
Order: Chiroptera (bats)
The bats' most distinguishing feature is that their forelimbs are developed as wings, making them the only mammals capable of flight. Bat species account for about 20% of all mammals.

Family: Pteropodidae (flying foxes, Old World fruit bats)
Subfamily: Pteropodinae
Genus: Mirimiri
Fijian monkey-faced bat, Mirimiri acrodonta CR
Genus: Pteropus
Samoa flying-fox, Pteropus samoensis NT
Insular flying-fox, Pteropus tonganus LC
Subfamily: Macroglossinae
Genus: Notopteris
Long-tailed fruit bat, Notopteris macdonaldi VU
Family: Molossidae
Genus: Chaerephon
Chaerephon bregullae EN
Family: Emballonuridae
Genus: Emballonura
Polynesian sheath-tailed bat, Emballonura semicaudata EN
Order: Cetacea (whales)
The order Cetacea includes whales, dolphins and porpoises. They are the mammals most fully adapted to aquatic life with a spindle-shaped nearly hairless body, protected by a thick layer of blubber, and forelimbs and tail modified to provide propulsion underwater.

Suborder: Mysticeti
Family: Balaenopteridae
Subfamily: Balaenopterinae
Genus: Balaenoptera
Dwarf minke whale, Balaenoptera acutorostrata LC
Bryde's whale, Balaenoptera edeni DD
Fin whale, Balaenoptera physalus EN
Pygmy blue whale, Balaenoptera musculus intermedia CR
Subfamily: Megapterinae
Genus: Megaptera
Humpback whale, Megaptera novaeangliae LC
Suborder: Odontoceti
Family Physeteridae (sperm whales)
Genus: Physeter
Sperm whale, Physeter catodon VU
Family: Kogiidae
Genus: Kogia
Pygmy sperm whale, Kogia breviceps DD
Family: Ziphidae
Subfamily: Hyperoodontinae
Genus: Mesoplodon
Blainville's beaked whale, Mesoplodon densirostris DD
Ginkgo-toothed beaked whale, Mesoplodon ginkgodens DD
Hector's beaked whale, Mesoplodon hectori DD
Family: Delphinidae (marine dolphins)
Genus: Stenella
Pantropical spotted dolphin, Stenella attenuata LC
Genus: Lagenodelphis
Fraser's dolphin, Lagenodelphis hosei LC
Genus: Feresa
Pygmy killer whale, Feresa attenuata DD


This is a list of the mammal species recorded in Niue. There are ten mammal species in Niue, none of which are known to be at risk.
The following tags are used to highlight each species' conservation status as assessed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature:

Some species were assessed using an earlier set of criteria. Species assessed using this system have the following instead of near threatened and least concern categories:
Order: Chiroptera (bats)
The bats' most distinguishing feature is that their forelimbs are developed as wings, making them the only mammals capable of flight. Bat species account for about 20% of all mammals.

Family: Pteropodidae (flying foxes, Old World fruit bats)
Subfamily: Pteropodinae
Genus: Pteropus
Insular flying-fox, P. tonganus LC
Order: Cetacea (whales)
The order Cetacea includes whales, dolphins and porpoises. They are the mammals most fully adapted to aquatic life with a spindle-shaped nearly hairless body, protected by a thick layer of blubber, and forelimbs and tail modified to provide propulsion underwater.

Suborder: Mysticeti
Family: Balaenopteridae
Subfamily: Megapterinae
Genus: Megaptera
Humpback whale, Megaptera novaeangliae VU
Subfamily: Balaenopterinae
Genus: Balaenoptera
Minke whale, Balaenoptera acutorostrata LR/nt
Suborder: Odontoceti
Family: Physeteridae
Genus: Physeter
Sperm whale, Physeter macrocephalus VU
Superfamily: Platanistoidea
Family: Ziphidae
Subfamily: Hyperoodontinae
Genus: Mesoplodon
Ginkgo-toothed beaked whale, Mesoplodon ginkgodens DD
Family: Delphinidae (marine dolphins)
Genus: Lagenodelphis
Fraser's dolphin, Lagenodelphis hosei DD
Genus: Stenella
Spinner dolphin, Stenella longirostris LR/cd
Genus: Globicephala
Short-finned pilot whale, Globicephala macrorhynchus LR/cd
Genus: Feresa
Pygmy killer whale, Feresa attenuata DD
Genus: Orcinus
Orca, Orcinus orca LR/cd


The Sea Mammal Research Unit (SMRU) is a marine science research organisation in Fife, Scotland. It provides the UK's main science capability in the field of marine mammal biology. It is located at the Gatty Marine Laboratory, part of the University of St Andrews. It was established in 1978, when the Natural Environment Research Council merged its Seals Research Division and Whale Research Unit.
SMRU's current strategic science priorities include evaluating the status of marine mammal populations; investigating the importance of marine mammals as components of marine ecosystems; determining the dynamics of marine mammal populations; studying marine mammal social structure and communication; providing the technological basis for observing free-ranging marine mammals and their environment. SMRU also uses the popularity of marine mammals to improve public knowledge about the marine environment.
SMRU's activities address the requirements for information about marine mammals identified in the UK and Scottish Sustainable Development and Biodiversity Strategies and the Strategy for Scotland’s Coast and Inshore Waters. It is also relevant to the Joint UK Response to the Review of Marine Nature Conservation, the EU Marine Strategy and the UK Small Cetacean Bycatch Response Strategy.
SMRU is an independent NERC collaborative centre. The funding it receives from NERC is mainly to support the Conservation of Seals Act 1970. SMRU focuses over half of its research effort on cetaceans. In agreement with NERC, SMRU raises the remainder of its funding from other sources. These include the European Union, Defra, Scottish Government and UK Ministry of Defence. It also develops and supplies instrumentation to the science community.
SMRU Consulting Ltd (Europe) was set up in 2006 as the commercial arm of the Sea Mammal Research Unit at the University of St Andrews and provides consultancy services and advice on marine environmental issues. They have offices in Europe, North America and Asia-Pacific.
Notable SMRU Consulting projects includes Marine Mammal Mitigation on the world's first commercial tidal device at Strangford Loch and the development of PAMBuoy, now Decimus - run by St Andrews Instrumentation Ltd.
On 1 June 2016, a dead Minke whale washed ashore on the West Sands beach of St Andrews, near to the SMRU, and was discovered by a dog walker that evening. During low-tide on 2 June, staff and students from the SMRU, along with the Scottish Marine Animal Strandings Scheme, jointly conducted a necropsy of the whale in view of the public. Noting signature abrasions on the tailstock, and excessive fluid in the lungs, they concluded that the animal had been caught in a fishing trawler's lines, and was drowned by the dragging.


Genetically modified mammals are mammals that have been genetically engineered. They are an important category of genetically modified organisms. The majority of research involving genetically modified mammals involves mice with attempts to produce knockout animals in other mammalian species limited by the inability to derive and stably culture embryonic stem cells.
Usage
The majority of genetically modified mammals are used in research to investigate changes in phenotype when specific genes are altered. This can be used to discover the function of an unknown gene, any genetic interactions that occur or where the gene is expressed. Genetic modification can also produce mammals that are susceptible to certain compounds or stresses for testing in biomedical research. Some genetically modified mammals are used as models of human diseases and potential treatments and cures can first be tested on them. Other mammals have been engineered with the aim of potentially increasing their use to medicine and industry. These possibilities include pigs expressing human antigens aiming to increasing the success of xenotransplantation to lactating mammals expressing useful proteins in their milk.
Mice
Genetically modified mice are often used to study cellular and tissue-specific responses to disease (cf knockout mouse). This is possible since mice can be created with the same mutations that occur in human genetic disorders, the production of the human disease in these mice then allows treatments to be tested.
The  oncomouse is a type of laboratory mouse that has been genetically modified developed by Philip Leder and Timothy A. Stewart of Harvard University to carry a specific gene called an activated oncogene.
Metabolic supermice are the creation of a team of American scientists led by Richard Hanson, professor of biochemistry at Case Western Reserve University at Cleveland, Ohio. The aim of the research was to gain a greater understanding of the PEPCK-C enzyme, which is present mainly in the liver and kidneys.
In 4 March 2025, Colossal Biosciences announced it had successfully bred a "woolly mouse" as part of its ongoing efforts to de-extinct the first woolly mammoth calf by the end of 2028.
Rats
A knockout rat is a rat with a single gene disruption used for academic and pharmaceutical research.
Goats
BioSteel is a trademark name for a high-strength based fiber material made of the recombinant spider silk-like protein extracted from the milk of transgenic goats, made by Nexia Biotechnologies. Prior to its bankruptcy, the company successfully generated distinct lines of goats that produced recombinant versions of either the MaSpI or MaSpII dragline silk proteins, respectively, in their milk.
Pigs
The enviropig is the trademark for a genetically modified line of Yorkshire pigs with the capability to digest plant phosphorus more efficiently than ordinary unmodified pigs that was developed at the University of Guelph. Enviropigs produce the enzyme phytase in the salivary glands that is secreted in the saliva.
In 2006 the scientists from National Taiwan University's Department of Animal Science and Technology managed to breed three green-glowing pigs using green fluorescent protein. Fluorescent pigs can be used to study human organ transplants, regenerating ocular photoreceptor cells, neuronal cells in the brain, regenerative medicine via stem cells, tissue engineering, and other diseases.
In 2015, researchers at the Beijing Genomics Institute used transcription activator-like effector nucleases to create a miniature version of the Bama breed of pigs, and offered them for sale to consumers.
In 2017 scientists at the Roslin Institute of the University of Edinburgh, in collaboration with Genus, reported they had bred pigs with a modified CD163 gene. These pigs were completely resistant to Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome, a disease that causes major losses in the world-wide pig industry.
Cattle
In 1991, Herman the Bull was the first genetically modified or transgenic bovine in the world. The announcement of Herman's creation generated considerable controversy.
In 2016 Jayne Raper and her team announced the first trypanotolerant transgenic cow in the world. This team, spanning the International Livestock Research Institute, Scotland's Rural College, the Roslin Institute's Centre for Tropical Livestock Genetics and Health, and the City University of New York, announced that a Kenyan Boran bull had been born and had already successfully had two children. Tumaini – named for the Swahili word for "hope" – had been given a trypanolytic factor from a baboon via CRISPR/Cas9.
Dogs
Ruppy (short for Ruby Puppy) was in 2009 the world's first genetically modified dog.  A cloned beagle, Ruppy and four other beagles produced a fluorescent protein that glowed red upon excitation with ultraviolet light. It was hoped to use this procedure to investigate the effect of the hormone estrogen on fertility.
A team in China reported in 2015 that they had genetically engineered beagles to have twice the normal muscle mass, inserting a natural myostatin gene mutation taken from whippets.
Wolves
Romulus, Remus, and Khaleesi are three genetically modified gray wolves, intended to mimic the extinct dire wolf. The first two, both being males, are named after Romulus and Remus of Roman myth, and the latter, a female, is named after the literary character Daenerys Targaryen from George R. R. Martin's book series A Song of Ice and Fire, who may be referred to by the honorific Khaleesi.
Primates
In 2009 scientists in Japan announced that they had successfully transferred a gene into a primate species (marmosets) and produced a stable line of breeding transgenic primates for the first time. It was hoped that this would aid research into human diseases that cannot be studied in mice, for example Huntington's disease,  strokes, Alzheimer's disease and schizophrenia.
Cats
In 2011 a Japanese-American Team created genetically modified green-fluorescent cats in order to study HIV/AIDS and other diseases as Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) is related to HIV.
